\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c
@c FIDOGATE documentation for 4.4
@c
@c

@setfilename fidogate.info

@iftex
@c A4 paper
@afourpaper
@finalout
@end iftex


@ifinfo
This file documents the installation and usage of FIDOGATE version 4.4

Copyright (C) 1994-2000, Martin Junius

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into other languages, under the above conditions for modified versions.
@end ifinfo

@c @setchapternewpage odd
@settitle FIDOGATE 

@titlepage
@title FIDOGATE
@subtitle Fido-Internet Gateway
@subtitle Fido FTN-FTN Gateway
@subtitle Fido Mail Processor
@subtitle Fido File Processor
@subtitle Fido Areafix/Filefix
@subtitle Version 4.4
@author by Martin Junius

@page

Copyright @copyright{} 1990-2000 Martin Junius

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into other languages, under the above conditions for modified versions.

@end titlepage
@page


@node Top, Introduction, , (DIR)
@top Introduction
@cindex Introduction

@noindent
This manual documents how to install and use FIDOGATE. It is the first
step toward a concise documentation. Alas, writing documentation is a
somewhat tedious business, so this manual is far from complete.

@menu
* Introduction::Introduction to FIDOGATE
* Installation::Compiling and installing FIDOGATE
* Programs::    FIDOGATE programs and scripts
* Config files::FIDOGATE config files
* Basic::       Basic configuration
* Usage::       FIDOGATE usage

* Index::       Index

 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Compiling and installing FIDOGATE

* config.h::    The config.h header file
* config.make:: The config.make Makefile configuration
* Compiling::   Compiling and installing FIDOGATE
* Integration:: Integrating FIDOGATE and the mail/news system
* Testing::     Testing FIDOGATE operation
* Connecting::  Connecting to FIDONET

Utilities

* ftnaf::       Areafix mail processor
* ftnafmail::   Areafix mail setuid frontend
* ftnafpkt::    Areafix packet processor
* ftnafutil::   Areafix utility

Character set translation table compiler:
* charsetc::    Character set translation table compiler

FFX programs and scripts:
* ffx::         Remote execution via Fido mailer
* ffxmail::     @code{ffx} frontend for sending mail
* ffxnews::     @code{ffx} frontend for sending news
* ffxqt::       Execute @code{ffx} requests
* ffxrmail::    @code{rmail} command for @code{ffxqt}
* runffx::      Script for running FFX programs
* send-ffx::    Script for processing news via FFX

Gateway programs and scripts:
* ftn2rfc::     Fido-Internet gateway program
* ftnin::       Frontend for @code{ftn2rfc}
* ftninpost::   @code{ftnin} post-processing script
* ftninrecomb:: @code{ftnin} recombining script
* ftnmail::     @code{rfc2ftn} setuid frontend
* rfc2ftn::     Internet-Fido gateway program
* rungate::     Script for running gateway programs
* send-fidogate::Script for processing news via FIDOGATE

Ticker programs:
* ftnhatch::    Hatch new file into file area
* ftntick::     Process incoming TIC files
* ftntickpost:: @code{ftntick} post-processing script

Tosser programs and scripts:
* ftn2ftn::     FTN-FTN NetMail gateway
* ftnexpire::   Utility to expire MSGID history database
* ftnpack::     Pack (ArcMail) Fido mail packets
* ftnroute::    Route Fido mail packets
* ftntoss::     Toss/remap/rewrite Fido mail packets
* runin::       Script for processing inbound packets
* runmail::     Script for processing gateway mail output packets
* runnews::     Script for processing gateway news output packets
* runout::      Script for processing miscellaneous output packets
* runtoss::     Script for running the tosser programs
* rununpack::   Script for unpacking inbound arcmail archives

Utilties:
* ftnbsy::      Create/delete Binkley busy files
* ftnconfig::   Retrieve information from FIDOGATE config files
* ftnfattach::  Binkley outbound file attach utility
* ftnflo::      Process Binkley outbound FLO files and attachments
* ftnlock::     Create/delete lock files
* ftnlog::      Write message to log file
* ftnoutpkt::   Create output Fido message packets
* ftnseq::      Access sequencer file
* pktdebug::    FTN mail packet debugger
* pktmore::     Pager frontend for @code{pktdebug}
* sumcrc::      CRC checksum utility

FIDOGATE Config Files

* Config::      Main configuration file
* Hosts::       hosts FTN address to host name conversion
* Aliases::     aliases user aliases
* Areas::       areas FTN area to newsgroup conversion
* Bounce::      Bounce messages of @code{ftn2rfc}
* Passwd::      passwd password config file
* Routing::     routing file for @code{ftntoss} and @code{ftnroute}
* Packing::     packing file for @code{ftnpack}
* Areas.bbs::   areas.bbs EchoMail distribution

Basic Configuration

* Sendmail::	       Sendmail configuration
* Example Point::      Example point configuration
* Example Point 2::    Example configuration with 2 point addresses
* Example Node::       Example leaf node configuration

FIDOGATE Usage

* RFC Headers:: RFC Headers in FTN Messages
* X Headers::   X Headers in RFC Messages
@end menu

@c ***************************************************************************
@page
@node Introduction, Installation, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction to FIDOGATE

@cindex Introduction


@noindent
FIDOGATE is a Fido-Internet gateway and a Fido tosser.  It is placed
under the GNU General Public License, see COPYING for details.

The gateway converts between the worlds of Fido NetMail/EchoMail (or
FTNs, Fido Technology Networks in general) and the UNIX mail/news
system. FIDOGATE will convert Fido mail packets to RFC822/1036-style
messages and vice versa.

FIDOGATE also includes a complete FIDO mail processor (NetMail/EchoMail
tosser), an FTN-FTN gateway (NetMail only), a file processor (TIC file
areas) and an Areafix/Filefix.


@section How to Get FIDOGATE

@noindent
The latest version of FIDOGATE is available at the locations.

@noindent
Internet WWW FIDOGATE home page:
@example
http://www.fido.de/fidogate/
@end example

@noindent
Internet anonymous ftp:
@example
ftp://ftp.fido.de/pub/fidogate/
@end example

@noindent
BBS and FIDO frequest:
@example
@r{2:2452/110 111  242:1000/1 2  +49-241-876604  (V.34, ISDN V.110, X.75)}
@r{Magic name }FIDOGATE
@end example


@section Requirements for FIDOGATE:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Something that gets you FIDONET mail. If you want a Unix-based Fido
mailer, I recommend using ifcico or BinkD.

@item
Installed news system (INN prefered)

@item
Mail transport agent (sendmail prefered)

@item
Perl (version 5 strictly required)

@item
M4 for compiling the sendmail config files

@end itemize


@section FIDOGATE Mailing List

@noindent
There is a @i{NEW} mailing list for FIDOGATE discussions and
announcements:

@example
fidogate@@fido.de
@end example

To @i{subscribe} to this mailing list, send a message to

@example
majordomo@@fido.de
@end example

@noindent
with the command 

@example
subscribe fidogate
@end example

@noindent
in the message @i{body} (not subject!). This will not immediately put
your email address into the mailing list. A confirmation mail with an
authentication code will be send to you, which must be returned to
majordomo to finally enable your subscription.

To @i{unsubscribe} from this mailing list, send the command

@example
unsubscribe fidogate
@end example



@section Credits
Most C code has been solely hacked by me, but there are also some source
files taken from other free software packages (GNU, INN). See the
various source files for details. In addition, many FIDOGATE users
provided bug fixes and patches, which found their way into the
distribution.

The ancestor of both FIDOGATE and ifmail was a Usenet posting to
alt.sources called @code{rfmail} ages ago. None of this original code
survived the massive rewrite and new code which makes FIDOGATE.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Installation, config.h, Introduction, Top

@chapter Compiling and installing FIDOGATE

@cindex Installation

@menu
* config.h::    The config.h header file
* config.make:: The config.make Makefile configuration
* Compiling::   Compiling and installing FIDOGATE
* Integration:: Integrating FIDOGATE and the mail/news system
* Testing::     Testing FIDOGATE operation
* Connecting::  Connecting to FIDONET
@end menu

@noindent
This chapter describes the FIDOGATE configuration and installation.  You
must also create and edit the config files to be installed in the
CONFIGDIR directory, @code{fidogate.conf}, @code{areas}, @code{hosts},
@code{passwd}, @code{routing}, @code{packing}, @code{aliases} according
to your setup (see the examples subdirectory).

The chapter on config files describes them in detail.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node config.h, config.make, Installation, Installation

@section The @code{config.h} Header File

@noindent
Normally, if you want to compile a standard version of FIDOGATE on one
of the supported platforms, it is @i{not} necessary to change anything
in this file. Most things can be configured or overridden in
@code{config.make} (compile-time) or @code{fidogate.conf} (run-time).

@noindent
If you really want to edit @code{config.h}, here are the gory details:

@table @code

@item LOCAL_FTN_ADDRESSES
Generate ``local'' FTN addresses: @i{User_Name%p.f.n.z@@hostname.domain}
instead of @i{User_name@@p.f.n.z.domain}.

@item DO_BSY_FILES
Create Binkley-style busy files while accessing the Binkley outbound.

@item NFS_SAFE_LOCK_FILES
Create lock / bsy files in an NFS-safe way.

@item AMIGADOS_4D_OUTBOUND
Use AmigaDOS-style outbound file names.

@item MAXMSGSIZE
Maximum size of FIDO messages generated by @code{rfc2ftn}, larger
messages will be split. Alas, less than 16K seems to be the only safe
setting. This is the default value.

@item FTN_INVALID_DOMAIN
Domain address to be used for invalid FTN addresses.

@item FACILITY
syslog facility used if @code{Logfile} is set to "syslog".

@item CHARSET_STDFTN
Default charset for Fido messages.

@item CHARSET_STD7BIT
Default charset for RFC messages with 7bit encoding.

@item ALIASES_ARE_LOCAL
Addresses found in the @code{aliases} config file are rewritten so
that the sender's address is the gateway.

@item PASSTHRU_NETMAIL
Passthru operation for NetMail: if the sender of the message is an FTN
address, the origin address of the resulting FTN message will be that
FTN address. WARNING: enabled only if you really know what you're doing!

@item PASSTHRU_ECHOMAIL
Passthru operation for EchoMail: X-FTN-Tearline, X-FTN-Origin,
X-FTN-Seen-By, X-FTN-Path headers will be used for tear line, * Origin,
SEEN-BY, ^APATH, when gating from Internet to FTN. WARNING: enabled only
if you really know what you're doing!

@item AI_1
@item AI_3
@item AI_5
@item AI_6
@item AI_8
Configuration for Andy Igoshin's patches, see
@code{contrib/fidogate-4.3a3-ai-pl9.1/README.ai} for
details. @code{AI_2,4,7} are now fully integrated.

@end table

@noindent
System dependent configuration:

This configuration contains several groups of #define/#undef. First, the
definitions for a standard POSIX UNIX, followed by #ifdef'ed definitions
for SunOS, Linux, FreeBSD, Interactive UNIX, MSDOS DJGPP, NextStep,
GNU-WIN32.

If you want to port FIDOGATE to a new system, please add a #ifdef'ed
section similar to the already existing ones.

The gory details:

@table @code

@item HAS_FCNTL_LOCK
Define, if the system support fcntl() file locking.

@item HAS_GETTIMEOFDAY
Define, if the system has the gettimeofday() function.

@item HAS_TM_GMTOFF
Define, if the system has a tm_gmtoff field in struct tm.

@item HAS_SYSEXITS_H
Define, if the system support the @code{sysexits.h} header file.

@item HAS_TM_ZONE
Define, if the system has a tm_zone field in struct tm.

@item HAS_STRFTIME
Define, if the system has the Standard-C strftime() function.

@item HAS_TZNAME    
Define, if the system has @code{extern char *tzname[2]}.

@item HAS_STRCASECMP
Define, if the system has the @code{strcasecmp()} and
@code{strncasecmp()} functions.

@item HAS_STRICMP
Define, if the system has the @code{stricmp()} and
@code{strnicmp()} functions.

@item HAS_STERROR
Define, if the system has the @code{strerror()} function.

@item DO_BINARY
Define, if files must be opened in binary mode.

@item DO_DOSIFY
Define, if filenames must be converted to DOS, OS2-style @code{\}.

@item RECEIVED_BY_MAILER
Define, if extra Received lines are inserted by the mail system,
currently only used for NeXT.

@item HAS_SYSLOG
Define, if syslogd and the library function @code{syslog()},
@code{vsyslog()} are suppored.

@item HAS_SNPRINTF
Define, if @code{snprintf()} and @code{vsnprintf()} are supported.

@item HAS_HARDLINKS
Define, if the system supports file systems with hard links and the
library function @code{link()}.

@item HAS_POSIX_REGEX
Define, if the system supports the POSIX regex functions regcomp(),
regexec() etc.

@end table

Define only one of @code{HAS_TM_ZONE}, @code{HAS_STRFTIME},
@code{HAS_TZNAME}, and also only one of @code{HAS_STRCASECMP},
@code{HAS_STRICMP}.



@noindent
@i{THE FOLLOWING DEFINES SHOULD REALLY BE LEFT AS IS!!!}

@table @code

@item MSGID_FIDONET_DOMAIN
Default domain for standard FIDO addresses (zone 1--6). Used for
Message-IDs only, so DO NOT CHANGE.

@item PACKET_MODE
@item BSY_MODE
@item FLO_MODE
@item DATA_MODE
@item DIR_MODE
@item CONF_MODE
Permissions for files processed by FIDOGATE.

@item FTN_RFC_HEADERS
RFC headers recognized at the beginning of FTN messages.

@item RFC_LVL_1_HEADERS
RFC headers put into FTN messages for RFC level 1.

@item R_MODE
@item W_MODE
@item A_MODE
@item RP_MODE
@item WP_MODE
@item AP_MODE
Modes (@code{fopen()}) for opening files.

@item DATE_LOG
@item DATE_DEFAULT
@item DATE_NEWS
@item DATE_MAIL
@item DATE_FROM
@item DATE_FTS_0002
@item DATE_TICK_PATH
@item DATE_VIA
@item DATE_SPLIT
Date format strings.

@item PRODUCT_CODE
FIDO product code used by @code{rfc2ftn}.

@item MAXADDRESS
Maximum number of @code{Address} and @code{Zone} statements in
@code{config} file.

@item MAXDOSDRIVE
Maximum number of @code{DosDrive} statements in @code{config} file.

@item MAXPATH
Maximum length of a pathname in FIDOGATE.

@item MAXINETADDR
Maximum length of the address part of an Internet address in FIDOGATE.

@item MAXUSERNAME
Maximum length of the user name part of an Internet address in FIDOGATE.

@item MAXOPENFILES
Maximum number of packet files concurrently opened by tosser
programs. The maximum possible value is operating system and
configuration dependent, see UNIX ulimits.

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node config.make, Compiling, config.h, Installation

@section The @code{config.make} Makefile Configuration

@noindent
This file is included in all FIDOGATE Makefiles.

A special convention is used for defining FIDOGATE configuration macros: 
macro name starting with @code{DEFAULT_} are used by the compilation
process to automatically generate C code.

@table @code

@item DEFAULT_V_@i{option}
Creates a Makefile macro definition, substitutes @i{<option>} in shell
and perl scripts, creates a compile-time C @code{#define
DEFAULT_}@i{option} in @code{paths.h}, a run-time configuration option
@i{option} in @code{fidogate.conf}, and makes FIDOGATE evaluate the
environment variable @code{FIDOGATE_}@i{option}.

@item DEFAULT_F_@i{option}
Creates a Makefile macro definition, substitutes @i{<option>} in shell
and perl scripts, creates a compile-time C @code{#define
DEFAULT_}@i{option} in @code{paths.h}. No run-time override!

@item DEFAULT_A_@i{option} 
Creates a @i{%X} abbreviation (can be used at the start of file names)
for @i{option}.

@end table

Be very carefull not to @b{remove} any of the FIDOGATE standard macros
and don't touch the standard abbreviations in this file!!!


@table @code

@item DEFAULT_V_CONFIGDIR
Directory for config files.

@item DEFAULT_V_LIBDIR
Directory for FIDOGATE's internal programs.

@item DEFAULT_V_BINDIR
Directory for user programs and scripts.

@item DEFAULT_V_LOGDIR
Directory for log files.

@item DEFAULT_V_VARDIR
Directory for @code{areas.bbs}, @code{history}.

@item DEFAULT_V_LOCKDIR
Directory for lock files.

@item DEFAULT_V_SPOOLDIR
Internal spool directory (temporary files).

@item DEFAULT_V_BTBASEDIR
BinkleyTerm-style outbound base directory. This is the base directory,
not the actual zone outbound directory.

@item DEFAULT_V_INBOUND
BinkleyTerm-style inbound directory.

@item DEFAULT_V_PINBOUND
BinkleyTerm-style protected inbound directory.

@item DEFAULT_V_UUINBOUND
BinkleyTerm-style inbound directory for the @code{recvuu} script.

@item DEFAULT_V_FTPINBOUND
BinkleyTerm-style FTP inbound directory.


@item DEFAULT_V_ACL
Access control list for AI patches (not used for standard FIDOGATE 
distribution).

@item DEFAULT_V_ALIASES
Configuration file for aliases.

@item DEFAULT_V_AREAS
Configuration file for areas/newsgroups gateway.

@item DEFAULT_V_HOSTS
Configuration file for registered hosts.

@item DEFAULT_V_PASSWD
Configuration file for passwords.

@item DEFAULT_V_PACKING
Configuration file for ArcMail packer (@code{ftnpack}).

@item DEFAULT_V_ROUTING
Configuration file for NetMail/EchoMail routing (@code{ftntoss},
@code{ftnroute}). 

@item DEFAULT_V_HISTORY
MSGID history file for dupe check.

@item DEFAULT_V_LOGFILE
Default log file.

@item DEFAULT_V_CHARSETMAP
Character set mapping table.


@item DEFAULT_F_NEWSETCDIR
INN directory: config files

@item DEFAULT_F_NEWSVARDIR
INN directory: active, history files.

@item DEFAULT_F_NEWSLIBDIR
INN directory: scripts.

@item DEFAULT_F_NEWSSPOOLDIR
INN directory: news spool.

@item DEFAULT_F_IFMAILDIR
Ifcico/ifmail directory.


@item DEFAULT_F_CONFIG_GATE
@item DEFAULT_F_CONFIG_MAIN
@item DEFAULT_F_CONFIG_FFX
FIDOGATE main configuration file @code{fidogate.conf}.


@item DEFAULT_F_SEQ_MAIL
@item DEFAULT_F_SEQ_NEWS
@item DEFAULT_F_SEQ_MSGID
@item DEFAULT_F_SEQ_PKT
@item DEFAULT_F_SEQ_SPLIT
@item DEFAULT_F_SEQ_FF
@item DEFAULT_F_SEQ_TOSS
@item DEFAULT_F_SEQ_PACK
@item DEFAULT_F_SEQ_TICK
Sequencer files.

@item DEFAULT_F_LOCK_HISTORY
Lock file for history access.

@item DEFAULT_F_OUTRFC_MAIL
@item DEFAULT_F_OUTRFC_NEWS
@item DEFAULT_F_OUTPKT
@item DEFAULT_F_OUTPKT_MAIL
@item DEFAULT_F_TOSS_TOSS
@item DEFAULT_F_TOSS_ROUTE
@item DEFAULT_F_TOSS_PACK
@item DEFAULT_F_TOSS_BAD
@item DEFAULT_F_OUTPKT_NEWS
Internal spool directories (temporary files).  If these directories are
different from the default ones, the commands for the
@code{install-dirs} target of @code{Makefile} must be changed as well.

@item DEFAULT_F_TICK_HOLD	= %B/tick
Outbound hold directory for TIC files.


@item DEFAULT_A_CONFIGDIR
@item DEFAULT_A_LIBDIR
@item DEFAULT_A_BINDIR
@item DEFAULT_A_LOGDIR
@item DEFAULT_A_VARDIR
@item DEFAULT_A_LOCKDIR
@item DEFAULT_A_SPOOLDIR
@item DEFAULT_A_BTBASEDIR
@item DEFAULT_A_INBOUND
@item DEFAULT_A_PINBOUND
@item DEFAULT_A_UUINBOUND
Abbreviations for configured directories.


@item PERL
Full path name of perl executable.

@item SENDMAIL_CF_DIR
Directory where the sendmail m4 configuration files are installed
(@code{/usr/lib/sendmail-cf} on RedHat Linux systems).

@item INFODIR
Directory for installing info documentation files.

@item HTMLDIR
Directory for installing HTML documentation files.

@item HTMLLOGDIR
Directory for installing CGI files.


@end table



@table @code

@item M4
m4 macro processor (for compiling sendmail cf files).

@item OWNER
Owner of FIDOGATE files.

@item GROUP
Group of FIDOGATE files.

@item PERM_PROG
Permissions for installing programs.

@item PERM_DATA
Permissions for installing data files.

@item PERM_SETUID
Permissions for installing setuid @code{OWNER} programs.

@item PERM_DIR
Permissions for installing directories.

@item CC
C compiler.

@item YACC
@code{yacc} or a clone like @code{bison -y}.

@item AR
@code{ar} monkey ... (@@!#$%&... ouch!) ... librarian.

@item RANLIB
Library utitility, if needed.

@item DEBUG
Optimize or debugging flags for compiling.

@item INCLUDE
C include (-I) options.

@item CFLAGS
Flags for compiling FIDOGATE.

@item LFLAGS
Flags for linking FIDOGATE.

@item LIBS
Libraries for linking FIDOGATE, including the FIDOGATE library
@code{libfidogate.a}.

@item INSTALL
Install program.

@item
Set to @code{.exe} for MSDOS, OS2, Win32.

@item INSTALL_PROG
Install command for installing programs.

@item INSTALL_DATA
Install command for installing data files.

@item INSTALL_SETUID
Install command for installing setuid programs.

@item INSTALL_DIR
Install command for installing directories.

@item PREFIX
Extra prefix directory for @code{make install}.

@item LIB
Name of the FIDOGATE library.

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Compiling, Integration, config.make, Installation

@section Compiling and Installing FIDOGATE
@cindex Compiling
@cindex Installation

@noindent
Compile the beast by entering
@example
make depend
make
@end example

Alternatively an optimized version can be compiled with
@example
make DEBUG=-O2
@end example


If everything works, you must create the necessary directories:
@example
make install-dirs
@end example
Then install all FIDOGATE programs:
@example
make install
@end example

Next you must create the configuration files in (default)
@code{/etc/fidogate}. Have a look at the various configuration in
directory @code{examples/} and use them to build your own configuration.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Integration, Testing, Compiling, Installation

@section Integrating FIDOGATE and the Mail/News System
@cindex Integration

@table @code

@item scripts/inn
Scripts for INN.

@item scripts/cnews
Scripts for CNews.

@item sendmail/cf
Sendmail V8 configuration files (m4) and example .mc files for
FIDOGATE: Fido.DE domain gateway morannon, orodruin, point setup.

@end table

Much more concise instructions should be here!!! ;-)



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Testing, Connecting, Integration, Installation

@section Testing the FIDOGATE Installation
@cindex Testing

@subsection @code{Tosser}

...


@subsection @code{Gateway}

...



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Connecting, Programs, Testing, Installation

@section Connecting to FIDONET
@cindex Connecting
@cindex FIDONET

@noindent
FIDOGATE does NOT include a FIDO mailer, so you have to transfer FIDO
mail to and from the UNIX system by some other means.

If you want everything running on the UNIX system, you need a FIDO
mailer for UNIX. Currently, this choice is limited to
@itemize @bullet
@item BinkleyTerm
@item ifcico
@item BinkD
@end itemize

I don't know what the current state of BinkleyTerm for Unix/Linux is,
but ifcico and BinkD are working very well for me. See the FIDOGATE home 
page at @code{http://www.fido.de/fidogate/} for links.

Another solution is a separate PC running DOS or OS/2 and BinkleyTerm as
a mailer. The Fido.DE gateway currently comprises a LINUX PC for the
gateway/tosser and Samba server, and an OS/2 PC running BinkleyTerm for
the analog phone and ISDN lines. The BinkleyTerm outbound is kept on the
LINUX server, so the OS/2 PC and the gateway have access to it.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Programs, ftnaf, Connecting, Top

@chapter FIDOGATE Programs
@cindex Programs


@iftex

@section Overview

@subsection Areafix programs and scripts

@table @code
@item ftnaf
Areafix mail processor
@item ftnafmail
Areafix mail setuid frontend
@item ftnafpkt
Areafix packet processor
@item ftnafutil
Areafix utilitiy
@end table

@subsection Character set utilities

@table @code
@item charsetc
Character set translation table compiler
@end table

@subsection FFX programs and scripts

@table @code
@item ffx
Remote execution via Fido mailer
@item ffxmail
@code{ffx} frontend for sending mail
@item ffxnews
@code{ffx} frontend for sending news
@item ffxqt
Execute @code{ffx} requests
@item ffxrmail
@code{rmail} command for @code{ffxqt}
@item runffx
Script for running FFX programs
@item send-ffx
Script for processing news via FFX
@end table

@subsection Gateway programs and scripts

@table @code
@item ftn2rfc
Fido-Internet gateway program
@item ftnin
Frontend for @code{ftn2rfc}
@item ftninpost
@code{ftnin} post-processing script
@item ftninrecomb
@code{ftnin} recombining script
@item ftnmail
@code{rfc2ftn} setuid frontend
@item rfc2ftn
Internet-FTN gateway program
@item rungate
Script for running gateway programs
@item send-fidogate
Script for processing news via FIDOGATE
@end table

@subsection Ticker programs and scripts

@table @code
@item ftnhatch
Hatch new file into file echo
@item ftntick
Process incoming TIC files
@end table


@subsection Tosser programs and scripts

@table @code
@item ftn2ftn
FTN-FTN NetMail gateway program
@item ftnexpire
Utility to expire MSGID history database
@item ftnpack
Pack (ArcMail) Fido mail packets
@item ftnroute
Route Fido mail packets
@item ftntoss
Toss/remap/rewrite Fido mail packets
@item runin
Script for processing inbound packets
@item runmail
Script for processing gateway mail output packets
@item runnews
Script for processing gateway news output packets
@item runout
Script for processing miscellaneous output packets
@item runtoss
Script for running the tosser programs
@item rununpack
Script for unpacking inbound arcmail archives
@end table

@subsection Utilities

@table @code
@item ftnbsy
Create/delete Binkley busy files
@item ftnconfig
Retrieve information from FIDOGATE config files
@item ftnfattach
Binkley outbound file attach utility
@item ftnflo
Process Binkley outbound FLO files and attachments
@item ftnlock
Create/delete lock files
@item ftnlog
Write message to log file
@item ftnoutpkt
Create output Fido message packets
@item ftnseq
Access sequencer file
@item pktdebug
Fido mail packet debugger
@item pktmore
Pager frontend for @code{pktdebug}
@item sumcrc
CRC checksum utility
@end table

@end iftex


@menu
Areafix programs and scripts:
* ftnaf::       Areafix mail processor
* ftnafmail::   Areafix mail setuid frontend
* ftnafpkt::    Areafix packet processor
* ftnafutil::   Areafix utility

Character set translation table compiler:
* charsetc::    Character set translation table compiler

FFX programs and scripts:
* ffx::         Remote execution via Fido mailer
* ffxmail::     @code{ffx} frontend for sending mail
* ffxnews::     @code{ffx} frontend for sending news
* ffxqt::       Execute @code{ffx} requests
* ffxrmail::    @code{rmail} command for @code{ffxqt}
* runffx::      Script for running FFX programs
* send-ffx::    Script for processing news via FFX

Gateway programs and scripts:
* ftn2rfc::     Fido-Internet gateway program
* ftnin::       Frontend for @code{ftn2rfc}
* ftninpost::   @code{ftnin} post-processing script
* ftninrecomb:: @code{ftnin} recombining script
* ftnmail::     @code{rfc2ftn} setuid frontend
* rfc2ftn::     Internet-Fido gateway program
* rungate::     Script for running gateway programs
* send-fidogate::Script for processing news via FIDOGATE

Ticker programs:
* ftnhatch::    Hatch new file into file area
* ftntick::     Process incoming TIC files
* ftntickpost:: @code{ftntick} post-processing script

Tosser programs and scripts:
* ftn2ftn::     FTN-FTN NetMail gateway
* ftnexpire::   Utility to expire MSGID history database
* ftnpack::     Pack (ArcMail) Fido mail packets
* ftnroute::    Route Fido mail packets
* ftntoss::     Toss/remap/rewrite Fido mail packets
* runin::       Script for processing inbound packets
* runmail::     Script for processing gateway mail output packets
* runnews::     Script for processing gateway news output packets
* runout::      Script for processing miscellaneous output packets
* runtoss::     Script for running the tosser programs
* rununpack::   Script for unpacking inbound arcmail archives

Utilties:
* ftnbsy::      Create/delete Binkley busy files
* ftnconfig::   Retrieve information from FIDOGATE config files
* ftnfattach::  Binkley outbound file attach utility
* ftnflo::      Process Binkley outbound FLO files and attachments
* ftnlock::     Create/delete lock files
* ftnlog::      Write message to log file
* ftnoutpkt::   Create output Fido message packets
* ftnseq::      Access sequencer file
* pktdebug::    FTN mail packet debugger
* pktmore::     Pager frontend for @code{pktdebug}
* sumcrc::      CRC checksum utility
@end menu



Almost all FIDOGATE programs support the following standard options,
which therefore aren't listed in the sections describing the individual
programs:

@table @code

@item -v --verbose
Increase the verbosity/debug level.

@item -h --help
Help on usage and options.

@item -c --config @i{name}
Read an alternate config file. @code{""} means none. @i{name} may
start with @i{%X/}, see below.

@item -a --addr @i{Z:N/F.P}
Set the main address of this program.

@item -u --uplink-addr @i{Z:N/F.P}
Set the uplink address (boss node) of this program (only useful for
gateway programs).

@end table


The option @code{-a} and @code{-u} also support Internet-style FTN
addresses, e.g. @code{p10.f110.n2452.z2}. If any of these options is
specified, all addresses from the config file are disabled.

All options and config statements which take file or directory names
accept the following @code{%} abbreviations:

@table @code
@item %C
CONFIGDIR
@item %L
LIBDIR
@item %N
BINDIR
@item %G
LOGDIR
@item %V
VARDIR
@item %K
LOCKDIR
@item %S
SPOOLDIR
@item %B
BTBASEDIR
@item %I
INBOUND
@item %P
PINBOUND
@item %U
UUINBOUND
@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnaf, ftnafmail, Programs, Programs

@section ftnaf --- Areafix
@cindex ftnaf
@cindex Areafix

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnaf  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @r{[}@i{Z:N/F.P}  @i{command} @r{]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -m --mail
Process Areafix mail message (RFC) on stdin.

@item -r --no-reply
Don't send reply via mail, write to stdout.

@item -n --no-rewrite
Don't rewrite AREAS.BBS.

@item -b --areas-bbs @i{NAME}
Use alternate AREAS.BBS.

@item -F --filefix
Run as Filefix program, using FAREAS.BBS.

@end table


@noindent Commands:

@table @code

  listall                      list all available areas
  list                         list areas available to node
  query                        list subscribed areas
  unlinked                     list unsubscribed areas
  from Z:N/F.P PASSWORD        set address and password
  passwd Z:N/F.P PASSWORD
  password Z:N/F.P PASSWORD
  +AREA                        subscribe to AREA
  AREA    
  subscribe AREA
  sub AREA
  -AREA                        unsubscribe from AREA
  unsubscribe AREA
  unsub AREA
  vacation AREA                set vacation flag for AREA
  &AREA [-options]             create new AREA
  new AREA [-options]
  create AREA [-options]
  ~AREA                        delete AREA
  delete AREA
  comment TEXT                 arbitrary comment (ignored)
  help                         this help

AREA names are not case-sensitive and support shell-style wildcards
  * ? [a-z] [abc], e.g. COMP.OS.*, [A-D]*.GER
@item listall
List all areas.

@item list
List areas available to node.

@item query
List subscribed areas.

@item unlinked
List unsubscribed areas available to node.

@item from @i{Z:N/F.P} @i{PASSWORD}
@item passwd @i{Z:N/F.P} @i{PASSWORD}
@item password @i{Z:N/F.P} @i{PASSWORD}
Set address and password.

@item +@i{AREA}
@item @i{AREA}
@item subscribe @i{AREA}
@item sub @i{AREA}
Subscribe to @i{AREA}.

@item -@i{AREA}
@item unsubscribe @i{AREA}
@item unsub @i{AREA}
Unsubscribe from @i{AREA}.

@item vacation @i{AREA}
Set vacation flag for @i{AREA}. NOT YET IMPLEMENTED!!!

@item &@i{AREA}  @r{[}@i{-options} @r{]}
@item new @i{AREA}  @r{[}@i{-options} @r{]}
@item create @i{AREA}  @r{[}@i{-options} @r{]}
Create new area. Nodes allowed to create an area must have the @code{&}
key in their @code{passwd} entry. Allowed @code{areas.bbs} @i{options}:
@code{-#}, @code{-p}, @code{-r}, @code{-l }@i{lvl}, @code{-k }@i{key},
@code{-d }@i{desc}, and @code{-z }@i{zone}.

@item ~@i{AREA}
@item delete @i{AREA}
Delete @i{AREA}. Nodes allowed to deleted an area must have the @code{~}
key in their @code{passwd} entry.

@item comment  @i{text}
Arbitrary comment, completely ignored.

@item help
Help on Areafix commands.

@end table

All command keywords may be prefixed by @code{%}. @code{ftnaf} also
recognizes the @code{-q} (= query) and @code{-l} (= list) options
following the password in the subject header.

For proper operation @code{ftnaf} requires the @code{X-FTN-From} header
generated by @code{ftn2rfc}, thus the @code{X-FTN} configuration must
include the @code{f} flag.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnafmail, ftnafpkt, ftnaf, Programs

@section ftnafmail --- Areafix Mail Frontend
@cindex ftnaf
@cindex Areafix

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnafmail  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -F --filefix
Run @code{ftnaf} as Filefix program.

@end table

This is the setuid mail frontend for @code{ftnaf} to be run from the
sendmail aliases. DO NOT use @code{ftnaf} directly, as this will result
in security problems.

@example
# Areafix/Filefix - FIDOGATE ftnaf
areafix: "|/usr/lib/fidogate/ftnafmail"
areamgr: areafix
filefix: "|/usr/lib/fidogate/ftnafmail -F"
filemgr: filefix
@end example



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnafpkt, ftnafutil, ftnafmail, Programs

@section ftnafpkt --- Areafix packet processor
@cindex ftnafpkt

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnafpkt  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @r{[}@i{packet} @r{... ]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -I --in-dir @i{name}
Set input directory. Default: PINBOUND

@item -O --out-dir @i{name}
Set output directory. Default: SPOOLDIR/outpkt

@item -l --lock-file
Create lock file while processing.

@item -r --no-reply
Don't send reply via NetMail.

@item -n --no-rewrite
Don't rewrite AREAS.BBS.

@item -b --areas-bbs @i{NAME}
Use alternate AREAS.BBS.

@item -F --filefix
Run as Filefix program, using FAREAS.BBS.

@end table

This is the packet processor frontend for the FIDOGATE Areafix, which
doesn't require the Unix mail system for Areafix operation. The best way
to use @code{ftnafpkt} is via the tosser.

@code{routing} example:
@example
Remap  2:2499/999.*  2:2499/999.101  "Area*"
#      ^^^^^^^^^^^^  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
#      node addr     pseudo point
#                    for Areafix

NetMail
Send  hold  2:2499/999.*
@end example

@code{packing} example:

@example
progn  areafix  "/usr/lib/fidogate/ftnafpkt %s"
pack   areaifx  2:2499/999.101
@end example

@code{runout} must be run regularly to process messages generated by
@code{ftnafpkt}.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnafutil, charsetc, ftnafpkt, Programs

@section ftnafutil --- Areafix utility
@cindex ftnafutil

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnafutil  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @r{[}@i{command} @r{... ]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -n --no-rewrite
Don't rewrite AREAS.BBS.

@item -b --areas-bbs @i{NAME}
Use alternate AREAS.BBS.

@item -F --filefix
Run as Filefix program, using FAREAS.BBS.

@item -O --out-dir @i{name}
Set output directory. Default: SPOOLDIR/outpkt

@end table

@noindent Commands:

@table @code

@item delete
Delete dead areas from @code{areas.bbs} (no uplink and no downlinks).

@item subscribe
Subscribe to area at uplink, if at least one downlink has subscribed to
this area (uses the @code{-s S/U} option in @code{areas.bbs}).

@item unsubscribe
Unsubscribe from area at uplink, if no more downlinks are subscribed to
this area (uses the @code{-s S/U} option in @code{areas.bbs}).

@end table

Auto-subscribe/unsubscribe will only be used for areas marked with the
state option. State @code{-s U} means that the area is not currently
subscribed at the uplink, @code{-s S} means that the are is subscribed
at the uplink.




@c ***************************************************************************
@node charsetc, ffx, ftnafutil, Programs

@section charsetc --- Character set translation table compiler

@noindent Usage:

@example
charsetc  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @i{charset.map}  @i{charset.bin}
@end example




@c ***************************************************************************
@node ffx, ffxmail, charsetc, Programs

@section ffx --- Remote Execution via Fido Mailer
@cindex ffx
@cindex Remote execution

@noindent Usage:

@example
ffx  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @i{Z:N/F.P}  @i{command}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -b --batch-dir @i{dir}
Operate in batch mode, using @i{dir}. Control and data files are not
immediately appended to the node's FLO file, but rather written to a
separate batch directory SPOOLDIR/out.ZZZ/@i{dir}. Implies @code{-n}.

@item -B --binkley @i{name}
Set Binkley outbound directory.

@item -F --flavor @i{flavor}
Set flavor of outbound FLO file: @code{Hold}, @code{Normal},
@code{Direct}, or @code{Crash}.

@item -g --grade @i{grade}
Set grade of control and data files to @i{grade} (single letter [a-z0-9]).

@item -n --nocompression
Don't compress data files.

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ffxmail, ffxnews, ffx, Programs

@section ffxmail --- ffx Frontend for Sending Mail
@cindex ffxmail
@cindex Mail

@noindent Usage:

@example
ffxmail  @i{Z:N/F.P}  @i{address} @r{...}
@end example

@noindent No options.

@code{ffxmail} calls @code{ffx} in batch mode (@code{-b}), selecting the
batch directory for the node address. Modify the script
(@code{src/ffx/ffxmail.sh}) for other addresses/batch directories.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ffxnews, ffxqt, ffxmail, Programs

@section ffxnews --- ffx Frontend for Sending News
@cindex ffxmail
@cindex Mail

@noindent Usage:

@example
ffxnews  @i{Z:N/F.P}
@end example

@noindent No options.

@code{ffxnews} calls @code{ffx} in batch mode (@code{-b}), selecting the
batch directory for the node address. Modify the script
(@code{src/ffx/ffxnews.sh}) for other addresses/batch directories.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ffxqt, ffxrmail, ffxnews, Programs

@section ffxqt --- Execute ffx Requests
@cindex ffxqt
@cindex Remote Execution

@noindent Usage:

@example
ffxqt  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -g  --grade @i{grade}
Process ffx jobs with @i{grade} only. @i{grade} must be a single letter.

@item -I --inbound @i{name}
Select the input directory where the @code{f???????.ffx} control files
are read from. Default: PINBOUND

@item -t --insecure
Process ffx files without password. Default: ffx file must contain a
password.

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ffxrmail, runffx, ffxqt, Programs

@section ffxrmail --- Rmail Command for FFX
@cindex ffxrmail
@cindex ffxqt

@noindent Usage:

@example
ffxrmail  @i{address} @r{...}
@end example

Perl script to be called by @code{ffxqt} for @code{rmail} commands to
receive Internet mail. This replaces @code{/bin/rmail} (UUCP), calling
@code{/usr/lib/sendmail} directly with appropiate options.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node runffx, send-ffx, ffxrmail, Programs

@section runffx --- Script for Running FFX Programs
@cindex runffx
@cindex ffxqt

@noindent Usage:

@example
runffx
@end example



@c ***************************************************************************
@node send-ffx, ftn2rfc, runffx, Programs

@section send-ffx --- Script for Processing News via FFX
@cindex send-ffx

@noindent Usage:

@example
ffxqt  @r{[}@i{hostname}@r{]}
@end example

Processes INN news batch file
@code{/var/spool/news/out.going/}@i{hostname}.




@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftn2rfc, ftnin, send-ffx, Programs

@section ftn2rfc --- FTN-Internet Gateway Program
@cindex ftn2rfc
@cindex Gateway

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftn2rfc  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @r{[}@i{packet} @r{... ]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -1 --single-articles
Write single articles to output files (in @code{tmpnews}), not news
batches containing several articles (batch is default).

@item -I --inbound-dir @i{NAME}
Set the input directory for FTN packets. Default: PINBOUND

@item -i --ignore-hosts
Don't bounce unknown hosts (unknown = not registered in @code{hosts})

@item -l --lock-file
Create lock file while processing.

@item -n --no-remove
Don't remove or rename input packet files, return exit code 1 if
processing fails.

@item -t --insecure
Operate in insecure mode. All messages containing a To line for gateway
addressing will be bounced.

@item -x --exec-program @i{SCRIPT}
Run @i{SCRIPT} after processing all FTN packets. Typically this is
@code{%L/ftninpost}.

@end table

@code{ftn2rfc} reads packet files from the input directory or the
command line and converts the FTN packets to Internet RFC mail and news,
written as mail and news RFC message files to the directories
SPOOLDIR/outrfc/mail and SPOOLDIR/outrfc/news, respectively.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnin, ftninpost, ftn2rfc, Programs

@section ftnin --- Frontend for @code{ftn2rfc}
@cindex ftnin
@cindex ftn2rfc

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnin  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -n --no-toss
Don't call @code{ftn2rfc} for processing.

@item -x --exec-program @i{SCRIPT}
Execute @i{SCRIPT} after @code{ftn2rfc} processing, typically
@code{%L/ftninpost}.

@end table

All standard options are passed to the called @code{ftn2rfc}.

@code{ftnin} looks for mail packets addressed to the gateway addresses
(all @code{Address}/@code{GateAddress} statements in
@code{fidogate.conf}) and calls @code{ftn2rfc} for each packet.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftninpost, ftninrecomb, ftnin, Programs

@section ftninpost --- @code{ftnin} Post-processing Script
@cindex ftninpost

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftninpost  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}
@end example

This script is run by @code{ftn2rfc} or @code{ftnin}, feeding the output
in SPOOLDIR/outrfc/mail and SPOOLDIR/outrfc/news to @code{sendmail} and
@code{rnews}, respectively.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftninrecomb, ftnmail, ftninpost, Programs

@section ftninrecomb --- @code{ftnin} Recombining Script
@cindex ftninrecomb

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftninrecomb  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}
@end example

If @code{FTNInRecombine} is enabled in @code{fidogate.conf}, this script
wil be run by @code{ftninpost} to recombine split messages. NOT TESTED
FOR RELEASE 4.4!!!



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnmail, rfc2ftn, ftninrecomb, Programs

@section ftnmail --- @code{rfc2ftn} Setuid Frontend
@cindex ftnmail

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnmail  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @r{[}@i{address} @r{...]}
@end example

Setuid frontend for @code{rfc2ftn}, passes the options

@table @code

@item -a --addr ADDR
Passed to @code{rfc2ftn} as @code{-a ADDR -u ADDR}.

@item -i --ignore-hosts
Passed to @code{rfc2ftn} as @code{-i}.

@item -O --out-dir DIR
Passed to @code{rfc2ftn} as @code{-O %S/DIR}.

@end table

@code{ftnmail} should be used for sendmail mailers. DO NOT use
@code{rfc2ftn} directly to avoid security problems.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node rfc2ftn, rungate, ftnmail, Programs

@section rfc2ftn --- Internet-Fido Gateway Program
@cindex rfc2ftn
@cindex Gateway


@noindent Usage:

@example
rfc2ftn  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @r{[}@i{address} @r{...]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -b --news-batch
Process news batch (implies @code{-n}).

@item -B --binkley @i{name}
Set Binkley outbound directory.

@item -i --ignore-registration
Do not bounce mail to nodes not registered in HOSTS (if
@code{HostsRestricted} in @code{fidogate.conf} is enabled).

@item -m --max-msg  @i{n}
Create new output packet after @i{n} messages.

@item -n --news-mode
Process news message in stdin. Default: mail

@item -o --out-packet-file  @i{name}
Write output to FTN packet file @i{name}.

@item -O --out-packet-dir  @i{name}
Set output directory for FTN packets. Default: SPOOLDIR/outpkt/mail or
.../news

@item -t --to
Get recipient addresses from To, Cc, Bcc headers instead of command line.

@item -w --write-outbound  @i{flav}
Write output directly to Binkley .?UT packets in outbound.

@item -W --write-crash
Write only crash mail directly to Binkley .CUT file.

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node rungate, send-fidogate, rfc2ftn, Programs

@section rungate --- Script for Running Gateway Programs
@cindex rungate

@noindent Usage:

@example
rungate
@end example



@c ***************************************************************************
@node send-fidogate, ftnhatch, rungate, Programs

@section send-fidogate --- Script for Processing News via FIDOGATE
@cindex send-fidogate


@noindent Usage:

@example
send-fidogate  @r{[}@i{hostname}@r{]}
@end example

Processes INN news batch file
@code{/var/spool/news/out.going/}@i{hostname}. If @i{hostname} is
omitted the default @code{fidogate} is used.




@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnhatch, ftntick, send-fidogate, Programs

@section ftnhatch --- Hatch new file into file area
@cindex ftnhatch

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnhatch  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @i{area}  @i{file}  "@i{description}"
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -b --fareas-bbs @i{NAME}
Use alternate FAREAS.BBS.

@end table

Please note that the @i{file} must already reside in the directory for
the file @i{area}. Copying and hatching a new file to a file area is not
yet implemented.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftntick, ftntickpost, ftnhatch, Programs

@section ftntick --- Process incoming TIC files
@cindex ftntick

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftntick  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -b --fareas-bbs @i{file}
Use alternate FAREAS.BBS.

@item -I --inbound @i{dir}
Use alternate inbound directory.

@item -t --insecure
Insecure processing, allow TIC files without password.

@item -x --exec @i{script}
Run @i{script} after sucessfully processing the TIC file. The one and
only argument to @i{script} is the full path name of the TIC file.

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftntickpost, ftn2ftn, ftntick, Programs

@section ftntickpost --- ftntick Post-processing Script
@cindex ftntickpost


@noindent Usage:

@example
ftntickpost  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @i{file.tic}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code


@end table

NOT YET COMPLETELY IMPLEMENTED! Currently the script is only a skeleton
with features such as announcement postings and mails to be added in the 
future.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftn2ftn, ftnexpire, ftntickpost, Programs

@section ftn2ftn --- FTN-FTN NetMail Gateway Program
@cindex ftn2ftn
@cindex Gateway

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftn2ftn  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @r{[}@i{packet} @r{... ]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -A --address-a @i{Z:N/F.P}
Set FTN address in network A.

@item -B --address-b @i{Z:N/F.P}
Set FTN address in network B.

@item -o --out-packet-file @i{NAME}
Set output packet file name.

@item -O --out-packet-dir @i{NAME}
Set output packet directory.

@end table

This program provides a NetMail gateway between different FTNs, using
the (somewhat) standard "User Name%Z:N/F.P" addressing in the FTN from
and to fields.

If no @i{packet} is given on the command line, @code{ftn2ftn} looks for
packets addressed to the gateway addresses (A and B) in the Binkley
outbound. Both gateway addresses must be specified with the @code{-A} and
@code{-B} options.

If a @i{packet} name is passed on the command line, @code{ftn2ftn} will
gate this to the other network A. The gateway address (sender of the mails
in network A) is set with @code{-A} option.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnexpire, ftnpack, ftn2ftn, Programs

@section ftnexpire --- Utility for expiring MSGID history database
@cindex ftnexpire

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnexpire  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -m --maxhistory @i{days}
Set the maximum number of days for entries in the history database. The
@i{days} argument supports decimal fractions.

@item -w --wait
Wait for history database lock file to be released. Default: exit, if
history database is locked.

@end table

This utility expires and rebuilds the MSGID history database, similar to
expire for the INN news system.

If the MSGID history database dupe check is used, @code{ftnexpire} must
be run regularly to keep the history database optimized (if not,
accessing the history database will become very slow!). A daily cron
job is just the right thing.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnpack, ftnroute, ftnexpire, Programs

@section ftnpack --- Pack Fido ArcMail Packets
@cindex ftnpack
@cindex ArcMail

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnpack  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @r{[}@i{packet} @r{... ]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -B --binkley @i{dir}
Set Binkley outbound directory.

@item -f --ffx @i{Z:N/F.P}
Pack ffx control and data files for FTN address @i{Z:N/F.P}. You must
also set the appropiate input directory with the @code{-I} option.

@item -F --file-dir @i{dir}
Set directory where @code{ftnpack} looks for file attachments. Should
be the appropiate inbound directory, see also the @code{runtoss}
script. If this option is not specified, no file attachments are
processed.

If @code{-F /} is specified, @code{ftnpack} accepts a complete path name
in the subject and doesn't search the directory. Warning: this option
compromises security to some degree, because it allows @b{any} user to
send @b{any} file readable by the user id running the tosser and
mailer!!!

@item -g --grade @i{grade}
Only process packets with @i{grade} (single letter).

@item -I --in-dir @i{dir}
Set input directory. Default: %S/toss/route

@item -O --out-dir @i{dir}
Set directory for temporary packets. Default: %S/toss/pack. This
is the directory, where packets to be put into arcmail archives will be
created.

@item -l --lock-file
Create lock file while processing.

@item -m --maxarc @i{size}
Set maximum size of an archive to @i{size} KByte. If an existing
ArcMail archive exceeds this size, @code{ftnpack} creates a new one.

@item -p --packing-file @i{name}
Read alternate @code{packing} config file. Default: %C/packing

@item -P --pkt
Process *.pkt files in the input directory. Default: output files of
@code{ftnroute}.

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnroute, ftntoss, ftnpack, Programs

@section ftnroute --- Route Fido Mail Packets
@cindex ftnroute
@cindex Routing

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnroute  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @r{[}@i{packet} @r{... ]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -g --grade @i{grade}
Only process packets with @i{grade} (single letter).

@item -I --in-dir @i{name}
Set input directory. Default: %S/toss/toss

@item -O --out-dir @i{name}
Set output directory. Default: %S/toss/route

@item -l --lock-file
Create lock file while processing.

@item -r --routing-file @i{name}
Read alternate @code{routing} config file. Default: %C/routing

@item -M --maxopen @i{n}
Set maximum number of concurrently open packet filess to
@i{n}. Default: @code{MaxOpenFiles} config

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftntoss, runin, ftnroute, Programs

@section ftntoss --- Toss Fido Mail Packets
@cindex ftntoss
@cindex Tossing

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftntoss  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @r{[}@i{packet} @r{... ]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -d --no-dupecheck
Disabled dupe check (if @code{DupeCheck} is enabled in
@code{config.main}).

@item -g --grade @i{grade}
Only process packets with @i{grade} (single letter).

@item -I --in-dir @i{name}
Set input directory. Default: PINBOUND

@item -O --out-dir @i{name}
Set output directory. Default: %S/toss/toss

@item -l --lock-file
Create lock file while processing.

@item -t --insecure
Insecure EchoMail tossing, don't check sender against nodes listed in
AREAS.BBS.

@item -n --toss-all
Toss all EchoMail, even messages not addressed to one of our own AKAs
(most probably routed EchoMail).

@item -p --passthru
Make all areas passthru (see also @code{#} in areas.bbs).

@item -r --routing-file @i{name}
Read alternate @code{routing} config file. Default: %C/routing

@item -s --strip-attribute
Strip Hold and Crash attribute from incoming NetMails.

@item -m --maxmsg @i{n}
Flush/close all output packet files after reading @i{n} messages.

@item -x --maxmsg-exit @i{n}
Flush/close all output packet files after reading @i{n} messages and
processing the current input packet, then exit.

@item -M --maxopen @i{n}
Set maximum number of concurrently open packet filess to
@i{n}. Default: @code{MaxOpenFiles} config

@item -b --fareas-bbs @i{file}
Use alternate areas.bbs.

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node runin, runmail, ftntoss, Programs

@section runin --- Script for Processing Inbound Packets
@cindex runin
@cindex Tossing

@noindent Usage:

@example
runin
@end example

@noindent No options.

Runs the tosser (unpack, toss, tick) for the inbound directories:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Insecure inbound
@item
Secure inbound
@item
UUEncoded mail inbound
@item
FTP inbound

@end itemize

All log messages are written to %G/log-in.

Edit the script @code{src/toss/runin.sh} to meet your local
requirements.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node runmail, runnews, runin, Programs

@section runmail --- Script for Processing Gateway Mail Output Packets
@cindex runmail
@cindex Tossing

@noindent Usage:

@example
runmail
@end example

@noindent No options.

Runs the tosser for the gateway mail output directory %S/outpkt/mail,
all log messages are written to %G/log-out.

Edit the script @code{src/toss/runmail.sh} to meet your local
requirements.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node runnews, runout, runmail, Programs

@section runnews --- Script for Processing Gateway News Output Packets
@cindex runnews
@cindex Tossing

@noindent Usage:

@example
runnews
@end example

@noindent No options.

Runs the tosser for the gateway news output directory %S/outpkt/news,
all log messages are written to %G/log-out.

Edit the script @code{src/toss/runout.sh} to meet your local
requirements.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node runout, runtoss, runnews, Programs

@section runout --- Script for Processing Miscellaneous Output Packets
@cindex runout
@cindex Tossing

@noindent Usage:

@example
runout
@end example

@noindent No options.

Runs the tosser for the miscellaneous (ftnafpkt, ftnafutil, ftnoutpkt)
output directory %S/outpkt, all log messages are written to %G/log-out.

Edit the script @code{src/toss/runout.sh} to meet your local
requirements.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node runtoss, rununpack, runout, Programs

@section runtoss --- Script for Running the Tosser Programs
@cindex runtoss
@cindex Tossing


@noindent Usage:

@example
runtoss  @i{type}
@end example

@noindent No options.

@noindent Types:

Please the the script source code @code{src/toss/runtoss.sh} for
available @i{type} parameters and feel free to adapt it to your
requirements.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node rununpack, ftnbsy, runtoss, Programs

@section rununpack --- Script for Unpacking Inbound ArcMail Archives
@cindex rununpack
@cindex Tossing

@noindent Usage:

@example
rununpack  @i{type}
@end example

@noindent No options.

@noindent Types:

Please see the script source code @code{src/toss/rununpack.sh} for
available @i{type} parameters and feel free to adapt it to your
requirements.

Edit the script if necessary to change unpacker program names. The
required programs are @code{unzip}, @code{unarj}, @code{lha},
@code{zoo}, @code{arc}, @code{rar}.




@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnbsy, ftnconfig, rununpack, Programs

@section ftnbsy --- Create/delete Binkley Busy Filess
@cindex ftnbsy
@cindex Busy files

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnbsy  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @i{Z:N/F.P} @r{...}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -t --test
Test for existing busy file.

@item -l --lock
Create busy file, fail if it already exists.

@item -u --unlock
Remove busy file.

@item -w --wait
Wait for busy file to be released (when @code{-l} option is given).

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnconfig, ftnfattach, ftnbsy, Programs

@section ftnconfig --- Retrieve information from FIDOGATE config files
@cindex ftnconfig
@cindex Config

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnconfig  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @i{parameter}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -l --no-newline
No output of newline after the parameter value.

@item -n --no-output
No output, exit code only.

@item -t --test-only
Output @code{1} if the parameter is present, @code{0} if not.

@end table

@noindent Special parameters:

@table @code

@item =fqdn
Fully qualified domain name.

@item =hostname
Hostname.

@item =domainname
Domainname.

@item =hostsdomain
Domain for entries in @code{hosts} config files.

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnfattach, ftnflo, ftnconfig, Programs

@section ftnfattach --- Outbound file attaches
@cindex ftnfattach
@cindex File attach

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnfattach  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @i{Z:N/F.P}  @i{file} @r{...}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -B --binkley @i{name}
Set Binkley outbound directory.

@item -F --flavor @i{name}
Set flavor of outbound FLO file to @i{name}: @code{Hold},
@code{Normal}, @code{Direct}, or @code{Crash}.

@end table

The file name may start with @code{^} or @code{#}, indicating that
the file should be deleted or truncated, respectively, after sending.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnflo, ftnlock, ftnfattach, Programs

@section ftnflo --- Process Binkley Outbound FLO Files and Attachments
@cindex ftnflo

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnflo  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @i{Z:N/F.P}  @r{...}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -B --binkley @i{name}
Set Binkley outbound directory.

@item -l --list
List entries in FLO file.

@item -n --no-delete
Don't delete FLO entries after processing.

@item -x --exec @i{command}
Execute @i{command} for every FLO entry, delete entry after successful
processing. @code{%s} in @i{command} is replaced with the filename of
the FLO entry.

@end table

The file name may start with @code{^} or @code{#}, indicating that
the file should be deleted or truncated, respectively, after sending.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnlock, ftnlog, ftnflo, Programs

@section ftnlock --- Create/Remove Lock Files
@cindex ftnlock
@cindex Lock files

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnlock  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @r{[}@i{NAME}@r{]}  @r{[}@i{ID}@r{]}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -l --lock
Create lock file @i{NAME}, fail if it already exists (exit code=2). If
@i{NAME} is not specified, the default @code{ftnlock} is used. The
optional parameter @i{ID} specifies the contents of the lock file, the
default is @code{-none-}.

@item -u --unlock
Remove lock file @i{NAME}.

@item -w --wait
Wait while creating lock file. Default: immediately return, if the lock
file can't be created because it already exists.

@end table

Lock files are created as %K/@i{NAME}.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnlog, ftnoutpkt, ftnlock, Programs

@section ftnlog --- Write Message to Log File
@cindex ftnlog
@cindex Log file
@cindex Logging

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnlog  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @i{message text}
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -p --program @i{NAME}
Set program name for logging.

@end table

This program is used to write a log message from a shell script. The log
file name may be specified with the @code{FIDOGATE_LOGFILE} environment
variable.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnoutpkt, ftnseq, ftnlog, Programs

@section ftnoutpkt --- Create Fido Message Packets
@cindex ftnoutpkt

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnoutpkt  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  "@i{user name} @@ @i{z:n/f.p}"  "@r{...}"
@end example

@noindent Options:

@table @code

@item -f --from "@i{user name} @@ @i{z:n/f.p}"
Set sender Fido address.

@item -s --subject "@i{subject}"
Set message subject.

@item -O --out-dir @i{dir}
Set output directory. Default: %S/outpkt

@end table

This utility can be used to create native Fido messages. The message
body text is read from stdin.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node ftnseq, pktdebug, ftnoutpkt, Programs

@section ftnseq --- Command Line Interface to Sequencer Files
@cindex ftnseq

@noindent Usage:

@example
ftnseq  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @i{sequencer}
@end example

This utilitity increments the named @i{sequencer} file and prints the
resulting value to stdout. Useful for accessing FIDOGATE sequencer files
from perl and shell scripts.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node pktdebug, pktmore, ftnseq, Programs

@section pktdebug --- FTN mail packet debugger
@cindex pktdebug

@noindent Usage:

@example
pktdebug  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @i{file} @r{...}
@end example

@noindent Options (standard options not supported):

@table @code

@item -m --msg-header
Print message header.

@item -t --msg-text
Print message text. Implies @code{-m}.

@item -s --short
Print contents in short format: packet from/to address and number of
NetMail and EchoMail messages.

@item -v --verbose
Increase verbose/debug level.

@item -h --help
Help on @code{pktdebug} usage.

@end table

This utility displays the packet header and optionally the message
header and message body contents.

See also the @code{util/pktmore} utitility, which pipes the output of
@code{pktdebug} to @code{$PAGER}.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node pktmore, sumcrc, pktdebug, Programs

@section pktmore --- Pager frontend for @code{pktdebug}
@cindex pktmore

@noindent Usage:

@example
pktmore  @i{file} @r{...}
@end example

@code{pktmore} uses the environment variable @code{PAGER} for the pager
program. Default: @code{more}



@c ***************************************************************************
@node sumcrc, Config files, pktmore, Programs

@section sumcrc --- CRC Checksum Utility
@cindex sumcrc
@cindex CRC
@cindex Checksum


@noindent Usage:

@example
sumcrc  @r{[}@i{-options}@r{]}  @i{file} @r{...}
@end example

@noindent Options (standard options not supported):

@table @code

@item -1 --skip-first-line
Skip first line in @i{file}. Useful for computing nodelist CRC.

@item -3 --crc32
Compute 32 bit CRC checksum, using the standard 32 bit polynomial (same as
in ZModem, ZIP). Default: 16 bit CRC CCITT polynomial.

@item -6 --crc16
Use alternate 16 bit CRC16 polynomial.

@item -x --hex
Output CRC value in hex. Default: decimal

@item -z --eof-at-ctrl-z
The Ctrl-Z character (@code{^Z}) indicates end-of-file (MSDOS kludge).

@item -v --verbose
Increase verbose/debug level.

@item -h --help
Help on @code{sumcrc} usage.

@end table

Use @code{sumcrc -1z} to compute the checksum for a standard Fido
nodelist. See also the nodelist processing scripts in
@code{scripts/nodelist/nl-*}.




@c ***************************************************************************
@node Config files, Config, sumcrc, Top

@chapter FIDOGATE Config Files
@cindex Config files

@noindent
FIDOGATE uses the following config files:

@iftex

@table @code

@item fidogate.conf
Main configuration file

@item aliases
User aliases

@item areas
FTN area to newsgroup conversion

@item bounce.*
Bounce messages of @code{ftn2rfc}

@item hosts
FTN address to host name conversion

@item passwd
Password config file

@item permissions
Permissions config file

@item routing
Routing file for @code{ftntoss} and @code{ftnroute}

@item packing
Packing file for @code{ftnpack}

@item areas.bbs
@item fareas.bbs
EchoMail / file echo distribution

@end table


FIDOGATE tries to find @code{fidogate.conf} in @code{CONFIGDIR}
(compiled-in default), the location and name of all other directories
and files can be specified in this main configuration file.

In addition, FIDOGATE 4.2.7 and newer support the environment variable
@code{FIDOGATE}, which tells where to find
@code{fidogate.conf}. FIDOGATE 4.3.0 and newer also support
@code{FIDOGATE_CONFIGDIR} for the very same purpose.


@end iftex

@menu
* Config::      Main configuration file
* Hosts::       hosts FTN address to host name conversion
* Aliases::     aliases user aliases
* Areas::       areas FTN area to newsgroup conversion
* Bounce::      Bounce messages of @code{ftn2rfc}
* Passwd::      passwd password config file
* Routing::     routing file for @code{ftntoss} and @code{ftnroute}
* Packing::     packing file for @code{ftnpack}
* Areas.bbs::   areas.bbs EchoMail distribution
@end menu


For all config files, a line starting with (some white space and)
@code{#} character is a comment and as well as an empty line completely
ignored.

All config files (with the execption of @code{areas.bbs} support an
@code{include} command for reading in other config files. @code{include}
must be the first keyword on the line, the filename is the next
argument.

All options and config statements which take file or directory names as
arguments accept the following @code{%} abbreviations:

@table @code
@item %C
CONFIGDIR
@item %L
LIBDIR
@item %N
BINDIR
@item %G
LOGDIR
@item %V
VARDIR
@item %K
LOCKDIR
@item %S
SPOOLDIR
@item %B
BTBASEDIR
@item %I
INBOUND
@item %P
PINBOUND
@item %U
UUINBOUND
@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Config, Hosts, Config files, Config files

@section Main Configuration File
@cindex Config
@cindex fidogate.conf


@noindent
@code{fidogate.conf} is the main configuration file for all FIDOGATE
programs.

NOTE: the new single configuration file replaces the different
configuration files @code{config.*} and @code{*.conf} of versions prior
to 4.3.0.

The format of @code{fidogate.conf} is:

@example
@i{keyword} @r{[} @i{arg ...} @r{]}
@end example

Keywords and arguments may be quoted in @code{""}, keywords are
case-insensitive.

See @code{examples/orodruin/fidogate.conf} for an up-to-date commented
version of the new config file.



@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@noindent
Common configuration:

@table @code

@item include @i{file}
Include another config file, may be nested.


@item ConfigDir @i{directory}
Directory for configuration files (default specified in
@code{config.make}).

@item LibDir @i{directory}
Directory for FIDOGATE-internal binaries and support files (default
specified in @code{config.make}).

@item BinDir @i{directory}
Directory for FIDOGATE user binaries and scripts (default specified in
@code{config.make}).

@item LogDir @i{directory}
Directory for log files (default specified in @code{config.make}).

@item VarDir @i{directory}
Directory for variable state files such as @code{areas.bbs},
@code{fareas.bbs}, @code{history} (default specified in
@code{config.make}).

@item LockDir @i{directory}
Directory for lock files (default specified in @code{config.make}).

@item SpoolDir @i{directory}
Internal spool directory for temporary files (default specified in
@code{config.make}).

@item BTBaseDir @i{directory}
The BinkleyTerm-style outbound @b{base} directory, to be specified
without the actual @code{out.}@i{nnn} zone directories (default
specified in @code{config.make}).

@item Inbound @i{directory}
The BinkleyTerm-style unprotected inbound directory (default specified
in @code{config.make}).

@item PInbound @i{directory}
The BinkleyTerm-style protected inbound directory (default specified in
@code{config.make}).

@item UUInbound @i{directory}
The BinkleyTerm-style inbound directory for UUENCODEd packets (default
specified in @code{config.make}).

@item FTPInbound @i{directory}
The BinkleyTerm-style inbound directory for FTP'ed packets (default
specified in @code{config.make}).


@item Aliases @i{file}
Aliases configuration file (default specified in @code{config.make}).

@item Areas @i{file}
Areas configuration file (default specified in @code{config.make}).

@item Hosts @i{file}
Registered hosts configuration file (default specified in
@code{config.make}).

@item Passwd @i{file}
Password configuration file (default specified in @code{config.make}).

@item Packing @i{file}
Packing configuration file (default specified in @code{config.make}).

@item Routing @i{file}
Routing configuration file (default specified in @code{config.make}).

@item History @i{file}
Dupe check history database file (default specified in @code{config.make}).

@item Logfile @i{file}
Standard log file (default specified in @code{config.make}).

@item CharsetMap @i{file}
Charset mapping table file (default specified in @code{config.make}).


@item LogFacility @i{facility}
@item LogLevel @i{level}
Facility and level when using syslog for logging (@code{LogFile
syslog}). NOT YET SUPPORTED: C programs use definition from
@code{config.h}, syslog support in Perl scripts (which use these
settings) is currently commented out.


@item DosDrive @i{drive} @i{directory}
OPTIONAL: specify translation of a DOS @i{drive} (e.g. @code{H:}) to a
directory. This is useful, if you keep your outbound on a UNIX server
and run BinkleyTerm on a DOS client. If one or more @code{DosDrive}
statements are specified, FIDOGATE will automatically translate file
attaches to the file names seen by the DOS client. Up to 16
@code{DosDrive} entries may be specified (@code{MAXDOSDRIVE} from
@code{config.h}).


@item AreasBBS @i{name}
Specifies the @code{areas.bbs} EchoMail distribution file.

@item FAreasBBS @i{name}
Specifies the @code{fareas.bbs} file echo distribution file.


@end table


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@noindent
Internet address configuration:

@table @code

@item Hostname @i{name}
The host name part of your Internet address.

@item Domain @i{name}
The domain part of your Internet address.

@item HostsDomain @i{name}
The domain used for entries in the @code{hosts} config file. Default is
the same as @code{Domain}.

@end table


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@noindent
Fidonet address configuration:

@table @code

@item Address @i{node}
The main Fidonet/FTN address (Z:N/F.P). There may be up to 32 @code{Address}
statements (@code{MAXADDRESS} from @code{config.h}).

@item GateAddress @i{node}
OPTIONAL: the Fidonet/FTN address of your gate, must be in the same
order as the corresponding @code{Address} statements. There may be up to
32 @code{GateAddress} statements.

If you're operating a Fido node, you may want to use a point addresse
for your gateway to avoid name problems with local users and the
gateway. If you're operating an official gateway in Fidonet or an
Othernet, you normally have a separate node address for the gateway.


@item Zone @i{zone} @i{domain} @i{ftndomain} @i{out}
Specifies Internet domain @i{domain}, FTN domain @i{ftndomain},
and outbound directory @i{out} (relative to @code{BTBaseDir}) for the
FTN zone @i{zone}. @i{zone} may be @code{default}, then this is the
default entry for not explicitely specified zones. Up to 32 @code{Zone}
entries may be specified (@code{MAXADDRESS} from @code{config.h}).

The gateway will only process mails from/to zones which are explicitly
specified here.

@end table


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@noindent
Areafix configuration:

@table @code

@item AreaFixMailer @i{command}
Mailer program used by @code{ftnaf} to send replies.

@item AreaFixCC @i{user@@domain}
CC address added to replies sent by @code{ftnaf}.

@item AreaFixHelp @i{file}
Help file for Areafix programs (@code{%help}) command.

@end table


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@noindent
Tosser configuration:

@table @code

@item MaxMsg @i{n}
Set maximum number of messages in output files to @i{n}, restricting the
maximum size of packets. See also @code{-m} option.

@item MaxOpenFiles @i{n}
Set maximum number of concurrently open packet files to @i{n}. Default: 10
(@code{MAXOPENFILES} from @code{config.h}), see also @code{-M} option.

@item MaxArc @i{Kbyte}
Maximum size of ArcMail archives created by @code{ftnpack}. See also
@code{-m} option.


@item MinDiskFree @i{Kbyte}
Minimum free disk space required by the @code{runtoss}
script. @code{runtoss} will terminate if there is less than @i{Kbyte}
free disk space in SPOOLDIR.

@item DiskFreeMethod @i{text}
Method to determine free disk space: @code{prog} uses program specified
with @code{DiskFreeProg}, @code{none} doesn't do any disk space
checking.

@item DiskFreeProg @i{command}
Command to determine free disk space, parameter @code{%p} is replace
with path name of the directory to be checked.


@item KillEmpty
@item KillBlank
Kill empty (blank) messages addressed to one of our AKAs. These are
typically file attach and file request messages.

@item KillUnknown
Kill messages for unknown EchoMail areas (not listed in
areas.bbs).

@item KillRouted
Kill routed EchoMail messages (not addressed to one of our
AKAs).

@item KillInsecure
Kill insecure EchoMail messages (sender not listed in @code{areas.bbs}).

@item LogNetMail
@item Track
Log all NetMail messages in log file.

@item CheckPath
Enable EchoMail circular path check (see @code{KillCircular}).

@item KillCircular
Kill EchoMail with circular path (own address already in @code{^APATH}).

@item DupeCheck
Enable dupe check (using @code{History} database).

@item MaxHistory @i{days}
Maximum length of history database. Keep entries for @i{days} days
(decimal fraction allowed).

@item KillOld
Kill messages with @i{date} < @i{now} - @code{MaxHistory}, i.e. treat as
dupes.

@item KillDupe
@item KillDupes
Kill duplicate EchoMail messages if @code{DupeCheck} is enabled.

@item KillNoMSGID
Kill EchoMail messages without a @code{^AMSGID}, i.e. treat as dupes.


@item ZoneGate @i{node} @i{seenby}
Zone gate operation: strip SEEN-BYs for EchoMail addressed to @i{node}
and replace with listed @i{seenby} nodes. @i{seenby} must include both
the link's and our address. Example:

@example
ZoneGate  1:105/42  105/42 2452/110
@end example


@item AddToSeenBy @i{area} @i{nodes}
Add the listed @i{nodes} to the SEEN-BYs for EchoMail tossed in
@i{area}. @i{area} may be specified using shell-style wildcards
@code{*?[a-z]}.


@item TossEchoMail4D
Generate 4D EchoMail control lines, i.e. SEEN-BY and PATH will include
point addresses.

@item NoEmptyPath
Do not generate an empty PATH line.

@end table


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@noindent
Ticker configuration:

@table @code

@item TickFlav @i{flavour}
Flavour of file attaches generated by @code{ftntick}.

@item FAttachFlav @i{flavour}
Flavour of file attaches generated by @code{ftnfattach}.

@item TickReplacedDir @i{directory}
Directory for old files replaced by @code{ftntick}.

@item UnknownTickArea @i{area}
File area to be used to TIC files with an unknown area. Incoming files
with an unknown area will be moved to this unknown area's directory.

@end table


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@noindent
Gateway configuration:

@table @code

@item Origin @i{text}
FTN default EchoMail origin line, the text used for the origins line
generated by @code{rfc2ftn}. Quote @i{text} in @code{""} if it contains
spaces. Individual origin lines may be specified in the @code{areas}
file using the @code{-o} option.

@item Organization @i{text}
Organization header for mail and news generated by
@code{ftn2rfc}. Quote @i{text} in @code{""} if it contains spaces.

@item UseOriginForOrganization
Put the text from the * Origin line (excluding the @i{(z:n/f.p)}
address) into the Organization header.

@item UseOrganizationForOrigin
Put the text from the Organization header into the * Origin line.

@item UseXHeaderForTearline
Use text from @code{X-FTN-Tearline}, @code{X-Mailer}, @code{User-Agent},
or @code{X-Newsreader} for the --- tearline.


@item UseFTNToAddress
Use FTN to address for mail addressed to the gateway without a To line,
e.g. mail to
@example
Max Mueller @ 2:2452/110.2
@end example
with a HOSTS entry
@example
2:2452/110.2  orodruin-ftn.fido.de
@end example
is converted to
@example
To: Max_Mueller@@orodruin-ftn.fido.de
@end example
Without this option the standard local HOST.DOMAIN is used, e.g.
@example
To: Max_Mueller@@orodruin.fido.de
@end example


@item EchoMail4D
Generate 4D EchoMail control lines, when the gateway operates at a point
address. @b{This is required when using the gateway and the tosser for a
Fido point!}


@item Gateway @i{node}
Specifies an FTN-Internet gateway for routing Internet mail to. If
enabled, FIDOGATE can be used as the default delivery agent for all
Internet mail.


@item DotNames
Generate @i{User.Name@@host.do.main} instead of
@i{User_Name@@host.do.main}. @code{rfc2ftn} recognizes both address
types.


@item KillUnknownMSGIDZone
Kill messages that contain a @code{^AMSGID} from an unknown zone (not
listed in @code{Zone} statements).

@item KillNoMSGID
Kill messages that don't contain a @code{^AMSGID} kludge.

@item KillSplit
Kill messages that contain a @code{^ASPLIT} kludge.


@item X-FTN @i{header}
Include the various X-FTN header in the output of @code{ftn2rfc}:
@table @code
@item f
@code{X-FTN-From}
@item t
@code{X-FTN-To}
@item T
@code{X-FTN-Tearline}
@item O
@code{X-FTN-Origin}
@item V
@code{X-FTN-Via}
@item D
@code{X-FTN-Domain}
@item S
@code{X-FTN-Seen-By}
@item P
@code{X-FTN-Path}
@end table
@code{X-FTN-From} is required for the proper operation of @code{ftnaf}.


@item MaxMsgSize @i{bytes}
Maximum size of FTN messages (default value), larger messages will be split.

@item LimitMsgSize @i{bytes}
Maximum limit for messages (default value), larger messages will be
bounced (mail) and simply not gated (news).


@item NoAddressInToField
Do not allow @code{@@ ! %} chars in the FTN to field, thus preventing
users from putting Internet addresses in the to field.


@item BounceCCMail @i{user@@do.main}
Send CC of bounced messages to this address.

@item TrackerMail @i{user@@do.main}
Forward mail from message trackers to this address.

@item HostsRestricted
Restrict usage of the gateway to FTN addresses listed in @code{hosts}.

@item FTNJunkGroup @i{name}
@i{name} of the FTN junk newsgroup (newsgroup for unknown FTN areas).

@item ErrorsTo @i{user@@do.main}
Insert additional Errors-To header into Internet mails, sending bounced
mails from gateway users to @i{user@@do.main}.


@item AreasXlate @i{area-chars} @i{newsgroup-chars}
Automatic translation (-H option in @code{areas} file) of characters for
Fido area <-> Internet newsgroup name conversion.


@item RFCLevel @i{n}
Set the default RFC level. See also @code{-R} option in @code{areas}.

@item NoFromLine
Don't generate @code{From:} header and FSC-0035 kludges. Must be set for
a non-gateway, point FIDOGATE configuration.

@item NoFSC0035
Don't generate FSC-0035 @code{^AREPLYADDR}, @code{^AREPLYTO}.

@item NoFSC0047
Don't generate FSC-0047 @code{^ASPLIT}, use old @code{ * Large message
split by } ... text line.


@item FTNInSendmail @i{command ...}
Sendmail program to be run by @code{ftninpost} with options. The option
@code{-fsender} will be automatically added by @code{ftninpost}. For
compatibility with old FIDOGATE configurations, any @code{-f%s} option
will be removed.

@item FTNInRnews @i{command ...}
Rnews program to be run by @code{ftninpost}.

@item FTNInRecombine
Automatically run @code{ftninrecomb} to recombine split messages.


@item NetMail8bit
Use the ISO-8859-1 MIME 8BIT character set when gating Fido NetMail.

@item NetMailQuotedPrintable
@item NetMailQP
Use the ISO-8859-1 MIME QUOTED-PRINTABLE character set when gating Fido
NetMail. @code{NetMailQuotedPrintable} overrides @code{NetMail8bit} if
both are specified.


@item XFlagsPolicy
Controls policy for X-Flags processing (default is 0, no processing):
@table @code
@item n   N   0
No X-Flags processing at all.
@item s   S   1
X-Flags processing for local sender (check From and Received
headers). This is not really secure!!! If your system is directly
connected to the Internet and runs an SMTP daemon such as sendmail, mail
can easily be faked to look like local!!!
@item a   A   2
X-Flags processing for all. Totally open, totally insecure!!!
@end table

@item DontUseReplyTo
Don't try to get real name from Reply-To header. Particularly useful for
mailing lists which set the Reply-To header to the mailing list.

@item RFCAddrMode @i{mode}
Mode for RFC address generated by FIDOGATE:
@table @code
@item ()  p  0
@i{user@@do.main (Real Name)}-type addresses
@item <>  a  1
@i{Real Name <user@@do.main>}-type addresses
@end table

@item ReplyAddrIfMailTX
Force @code{^AREPLYADDR} (if @code{FSC0035} is enabled) to only contains
@code{^AREPLYADDR <user@@do.main>} for compatibility with ifmail-TX.


@item CheckAreasBBS
Check @code{areas.bbs} when gating newsgroups, message for areas without
downlinks will be skipped.


@item DefaultCharset @i{default}:@i{ftn}:@i{rfc}
Default character set mapping for the gateway: @i{default} is the
charset assumed for FTN messages, if no @code{^ACHRS} kludge is present
in the message. @i{ftn} is the charset to be used in the FTN messages
when gating from RFC to FTN (use FSC-0054 names here), @i{rfc} likewise
when gating from FTN to RFC (use RFC 2045 names here). See also the
@code{-C} option in the @code{areas} config file.

@item NetMailCharset @i{default}:@i{ftn}:@i{rfc}
Like @code{DefaultCharset}, but only for NetMail (mail) messages.

@item NetMailCharsetUse1st
If set and no matching in/out character set is found, @code{ftn2rfc}
will use the first character set translation pair from
@code{charset.map} with in charset = Fido @code{^ACHRS} and set the
output character set accordingly. NOT YET IMPLEMENTED.


@item NewsPathTail @i{string}
String added to news Path header generated by @code{ftn2rfc}, the
de-facto standard is @code{not-for-mail}. Alternatively you can set this
to @code{fidogate!not-for-mail} making the INN @code{newsfeeds} much
easier and less error-prone, particularly for point systems.


@item SingleArticles
Write single articles to output RFC files generated by @code{ftn2rfc},
not news batches containing several articles (batch is default).


@item Regex1stLine @i{pattern}
Regular expression patterns for finding addresses in the first line of
the messages body. The first (...) sub-expression will be used for the
address (like \1 in sed, $1 in perl). POSIX *extended* regular
expressions are used.  The OS @b{must} support @code{HAS_POSIX_REGEX} in
@code{config.h}!

As of FIDOGATE 4.3.4, the compiled-in pattern matching code is no longer 
availabe. See @code{examples/orodruin/fidogate.conf} for a suitable list 
of regular expressions.


@item MessageLineLength @i{number}
Line length for formatting long paragraphs (no explicit line break) from 
Fido messages. This replaces the old @code{MAX_LINELEN} from
@code{config.h}. The default value is 72.


@end table


@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@noindent
FFX configuration:

(FFX is a part of FIDOGATE, an uux-like mechanism for remote execution,
using a Fido mailer instead of UUCP for transport. This is a special
hack for my own purposes, most likely you don't want to know anything
about it. Simply ignore or remove this section from the config file.)

@table @code

@item FFXDataFlav @i{flavour}
Flavour to be used for file attachments created by the @code{ffx} program.

@item FFXDataCompr @i{command ...}
Program to be used for creating compressed @code{ffx} data files.

@item FFXDataExt @i{parameter}
File name extension to be used for compressed @code{ffx} data files.

@item FFXDataDecompr @i{parameter}
Uncompressor name for compressed @code{ffx} data files (will be run by
@code{ffxqt}).

@item FFXDataComprN @i{parameter}
Program to be used for creating uncompress @code{ffx} data files (option
@code{-n}).

@item FFXDataExtN @i{parameter}
File name extension to be used for uncompressed @code{ffx} data files
(option @code{-n}).

@item FFXDataDecomprN @i{parameter}
Uncompressor name for uncompressed @code{ffx} data files (option
@code{-n}, will be run by @code{ffxqt}).

@item FFXCommand @i{name} @i{command ...}
List of command names and corresponding commands to be used by
@code{ffxqt}. Only the commands listed can be executed. This replaces
the old LIBDIR/ffxqt-dir/@i{name} structure of previous FIDOGATE
versions.

@item FFXUncompress @i{name} @i{command ...}
List of uncompressor names and corresponding commands to be used by
@code{ffxqt}.

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Hosts, Aliases, Config, Config files

@section @code{hosts} FTN Address to Host Name Conversion
@cindex Hosts

@noindent
This file contains the FTN addresses and host names for registered FTN
nodes. If @code{HostsRestricted} is defined in @code{config.gate}, this
file controls the access to the gateway.

@noindent The format of this file is

@example
@i{node}  @i{hostname}  @r{[} @i{options} @r{]}
@end example

@noindent Fields:

@table @i

@item node
FTN address. An address for a node will match all points of this node,
see example below.

@item hostname
Host name, one of

@table @i
@item local host name
A name without a trailing @code{.} is a hostname in the local
domain (specified by @code{HostsDomain} or default @code{Domain}
in @code{config}).
@item fully qualified domain name
A name with a trailing @code{.} is a fully qualified domain name
for this node.
@item @code{-}
A @code{-} specifies a listed node, but without a host name
translation, using the standard @i{p.f.n.z} address.
@end table

@item options

@table @code
@item -p
Generate addresses with point part, e.g. @code{p99.hippo.fido.de}.
Default is omitting the point part.
@item -d
Mark the node as down, mail to this address will be bounced with
an appropiate error message.
@end table

@end table

The @code{hosts} file is read into memory during startup of FIDOGATE.
The first entry found matches, so a host name for a point must be
specified @i{before} the boss node, if there are entries for both.

Example:

@noindent @code{config}:

@example
HostsDomain   .Fido.DE
@end example

@noindent @code{hosts}:

@example
2:2452/110    hippo
2:2452/990    test     -p
2:2452/991    test.wusel.org.
2:2452/999    -
@end example

@noindent
Resulting data base read into memory:

@example
Node:     2:2452/110.0
Hostname: hippo.Fido.DE
Flags:    

Node:     2:2452/990.0
Hostname: test.Fido.DE
Flags:    POINT

Node:     2:2452/991.0
Hostname: test.wusel.org
Flags:

Node:     2:2452/999.0
Hostname:
Flags:
@end example

@noindent This results in the following conversion of addresses from FTN
to Internet:

@example
2:2452/110     ->  hippo.Fido.DE
2:2452/110.99  ->  hippo.Fido.DE
2:2452/990.99  ->  p99.test.Fido.DE
2:2452/991.1   ->  test.wusel.org
2:2452/999.2   ->  p2.f999.n2452.z2.Fido.DE
@end example



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Aliases, Areas, Hosts, Config files

@section @code{aliases} User Aliases
@cindex Aliases

@noindent
This file contains user aliases, the FTN address, and the full name of
the user.

@noindent The format of this file is

@example
@i{alias}  @i{node}  "@i{full name}"
@end example

@noindent Fields:

@table @i

@item alias
Alias for the user, can be a local @code{user} or a complete Internet
address @code{user@@do.main}.

@item node
FTN address of the user.

@item full name
Full name of the user.

@end table

The FTN address @i{node} may be a point address. In this case mail
addressed to the user at the boss node address will be readdressed to
this point, see example below.

Example:

@noindent @code{aliases}:

@example
mvr         2:2452/110.6    "Marc van.Rey"
@end example

Using the definitions from the section on @code{hosts}, this results in
the following address conversion:

@example
Marc van.Rey @@ 2:2452/110.6  <->  mvr@@hippo.Fido.DE
@end example



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Areas, Bounce, Aliases, Config files

@section @code{areas} FTN Area to Newsgroup Conversion
@cindex Areas

@noindent
This file contains FTN areas with corresponding newsgroups and options.

@noindent The format of this file is

@example
@i{area}  @i{newsgroup}  @r{[} @i{options} @r{]}
@end example

@noindent Fields:

@table @i

@item area
FTN area.

@item newsgroup
Usenet newsgroup.

@item options
IMPORTANT: there must be spaces between the option and its argument!

@table @code

@item -a @i{address}
Select alternate FTN address for this area/newsgroup.

@item -z @i{zone}
Select zone AKA @i{zone} for this area/newsgroup.

@item -d @i{distribution}
Use Usenet @code{distribution} for this newsgroup when gating from FTN
to Internet.

@item -o "@i{origin}"
Use an alternate origin line for this area when gating from Internet to
FTN.  (Default specified in @code{config}.)

@item -g
Don't send messages from another SomeNet-FTN gateway across the gateway.

@item -l
Only local crosspostings are allowed in this newsgroup/area.

@item -x
No crosspostings are allowed in this newsgroup/area.

@item -8
Use the ISO-8859-1 MIME 8BIT character set when gating to this
newsgroup.

@item -Q
Use the ISO-8859-1 MIME quoted-printable character set when gating to
this newsgroup.

@item -H
Area/newsgroup matches entire hierarchy. Names are converted
automatically, using upper case for area names and lower case for
newsgroups.

Example:
@example
GNU.    gnu.    -z 242  -H
@end example
@code{gnu.announce} will be converted to @code{GNU.ANNOUNCE},
@code{gnu.bug.gcc} to @code{GNU.BUG.GCC}, similar for all other.

@item -!
Don't gate this area/newsgroup or hierarchy (if combined with
@code{-H}). Usefull to exclude certain newsgroups from a hierarchy for
gating.

Example:
@example
ALT.BINARIES.    alt.binaries.    -z 242  -H -!
ALT.             alt.             -z 242  -H
@end example
This is roughly equivalent to INN's @code{alt.*,!alt.binaries.*}. Please
note that the first @code{areas} entry matches, so any @code{-!} must be
placed before the @code{-H} hierarchy definition.

@item -R @i{level}
Select level of @code{^ARFC-}Header put into FIDO messages for this
area. Level:
@table @r
@item 0
No @code{^ARFC-}header at all.
@item 1
Only important @code{^ARFC-}header.
@item 2
All @code{^ARFC-}header.
@end table

@item -m @i{bytes}
Sets @code{MaxMsgSize} for this area (0 = no limit).

@item -M @i{bytes}
Sets @code{LimitMsgSize} for this area (0 = no limit).

@item -X "@i{RFC-Header: text}"
Add extra RFC header to output of @code{ftn2rfc}. Multiple @code{-X}
options are possible.

@item -C @i{default}:@i{ftn}:@i{rfc}
Set character set mapping table for this area, see @code{DefaultCharset}
config option for details.

@end table

@end table

Only newsgroups listed in this file will be gated from Internet to FTN.
FTN area not listed in this file will be gated into the
@code{FTNJunkGroup} newsgroup specified in @code{fidogate.conf}.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Bounce, Passwd, Areas, Config files

@section Bounce Messages of @code{ftn2rfc}
@cindex Bounce messages

@noindent
@code{ftn2rfc} uses the following files for messages sent to the FTN
user when bouncing mail for some reason:

@table @code

@item bounce.noto
Message addressed to user @code{UUCP} or @code{GATEWAY} without a
@code{To} line at the very beginning of the message.

@item bounce.down
Message addressed from/to node currently marked as @i{down} in
@code{hosts} (@code{-d} flag).

@item bounce.restricted
Messages from nodes not listed in @code{hosts}, gateway running in
restricted mode.

@item bounce.insecure
Messages came via an insecure (i.e. not password protected) link and
contain a @code{To} line. This requires the @code{-t} option to
@code{ftn2rfc}.

@end table

Within a bounce message, the following substitutions can be used:

@table @code

@item %F
FTN address of message sender.
@item %T
FTN address of message recipient (the gateway, that is).
@item %O
FTN address of message origin.
@item %d
Date/time of message.
@item %t
Name of message recipient.
@item %f
Name of message sender.
@item %s
Message subject.
@item %R
@code{To} line, Internet address.
@item %M
The entire message body.

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Passwd, Routing, Bounce, Config files

@section @code{passwd} Password Config File
@cindex Password

@noindent
This file contains passwords used by @code{ftnaf}, @code{ffx}, and the
tosser programs.

@noindent The format of this file is:

@example
@i{context}  @i{node}  @i{password}  @i{options}
@end example

@noindent Contexts:

@table @code

@item packet
FTN packet passwords, checked by @code{ftntoss}, inserted by all
FIDOGATE programs which create FTN packets. Password checking for
incoming packets is NOT YET IMPLEMENTED.

@item af
Areafix passwords for requests.

@item ff
Filefix passwords for requests and password for sending/receiving TIC
files.

@item ffx
@code{ffx} command passwords, checked by @code{ffxqt}, inserted by
@code{ffx} into the @code{.ffx} command files.

@item uplink
Passwords for forwarding areafix/filefix request to uplink.

@end table

Optional stuff (@i{options}) is used for @code{af} and @code{ff}
permission settings:

@example
@i{lvl}  @i{key}  "@i{Sysop Name}"
@end example

@i{lvl} is the access level, which must be greater or equal than the one
in @code{areas.bbs}. @i{key} is the access key, which must be a super
set of the one in @code{areas.bbs}.

Optional stuff (@i{options}) is used for @code{uplink}:

@example
"@i{name}"
@end example

@i{name} is the user name (normally @code{Areafix} or @code{Areamgr}) at
@i{node} address, where areafix requests must be forwarded to. Used by
@code{ftnafutil}.


Example:

@example
uplink      2:2499/99       XXXXXXXX    AreaMgr
packet      2:1234/5678     WUERG
ffx         242:1111/99     BLAHBLUB
af          2:1234/5678     WUSEL       1   F     "Test Sysop"
ff          242:1234/5678   WUSEL       4   UQ    "Yet Another Sysop"
@end example



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Routing, Packing, Passwd, Config files

@section @code{routing} Config File
@cindex Routing

@noindent
This file contains the routing commands performed by @code{ftntoss}
(commands @code{remap} and @code{rewrite}) and @code{ftnroute}
(everything else). The first routing command found matches.

The syntax of the @code{routing} commands is very similar to the routing
file used by the well-known FIDO tossers QMail and SQUISH.

@noindent The format of this file is:

@example
remap      @i{src-node}  @i{dest-node}  @i{name}
remapto    @i{src-node}  @i{dest-node}  @i{name}
remapx     @i{src-node}  @i{prog}       @i{name}
remapfrom  @i{src-node}  @i{dest-node}  @i{name}
rewrite    @i{src-node}  @i{dest-node}

echomail
netmail

send       @i{flavor}    @i{nodes}
route      @i{flavor}    @i{dest-node} @i{nodes}
hostroute  @i{flavor}    @i{nodes}
hubroute   @i{flavor}    @i{nodes}
xroute     @i{flavor}    @i{dest-node} @i{from-node} @i{to-node}
bossroute  @i{flavor}    @i{nodes}

change     @i{old-flavor}  @i{new-flavor}  @i{nodes}

sendmove   @i{flavor}    @i{nodes}
@end example

@noindent Commands:

@table @code

@item remap
@item remapto
Remaps NetMail addressed to @i{name} at @i{src-node} to the new address
@i{dest-node}. Most useful for remapping to points based on their name.
@i{name} supports shell-style wildcard patterns. Remapping to 0:0/0.0
means killing the message.

@item remapx
Remaps NetMail addressed to @i{name} at @i{src-node} to special
processing with @i{prog} (actually writing it to a packet in
@code{%S/remapx/}@i{prog}. Most useful for processing areafix
messages. @i{name} supports shell-style wildcard patterns.
NOT YET IMPLEMENTED.

@item remapfrom
Remaps NetMail from @i{name} at @i{src-node} to the new address
@i{dest-node}. @i{name} supports shell-style wildcard
patterns. Remapping to 0:0/0.0 means killing the message.

@item rewrite
Rewrites NetMail from and to addresses. A node address matching
@i{src-node} will be changed to @i{dest-node}.

@item echomail
Starts routing commands for EchoMail.

@item netmail
Starts routing commands for NetMail.

@item allmail
Starts routing commands for both EchoMail and NetMail. NOT YET
IMPLEMENTED.

@item send
Send normal mail addressed to @i{nodes} with @i{flavor}.

WARNING: e.g. @code{send hold 2:2452/110} actually is the same as
@code{route hold 2:2452/110.0 2452/110.*}. So @code{send hold 2:2452/110
110.*} will @b{not} have the desired effect, use @code{send hold
2:2452/110.*} only instead!!!

@item route
Route normal mail addressed to @i{nodes} via @i{dest-node}, using
@i{flavor}.

@item hostroute
Route normal mail addressed to @i{nodes} via their host (i.e. Z:N/0),
using @i{flavor}.

@item hubroute
Route normal mail addressed to @i{nodes} via their hub,
using @i{flavor}. NOT YET IMPLEMENTED.

@item xroute
Route normal mail from @i{from-node} to @i{to-node} via @i{dest-node},
using @i{flavor}. NOT YET IMPLEMENTED.

@item bossroute
Route @i{flavor} mail addressed to @i{nodes} via their boss node, not
changing the flavor.

@item change
Change flavor of mail packet from @i{old-flavor} to @i{new-flavor}.

@item sendmove
Like @code{send}, but @code{ftnroute} doesn't copy the mail packets,
they are moved instead. This requires that SPOOLDIR/toss/tmp and
SPOOLDIR/toss/out are on the same file system/disk drive.

@end table

Node addresses @i{nodes}, @i{src-node}, @i{dest-node} support wildcards
using @code{*} and @code{all}, which can be used for the zone, net,
node, and point component of an address. @code{*} alone matches all
addresses. @code{rewrite} wildcards in the destination address are
replaced with the corresponding component of the source address.

@noindent The outbound flavor string @i{flavor} can be any of
@code{normal}, @code{hold}, @code{crash}, @code{direct}, @code{out},
@code{hut}, @code{cut}, @code{dut}.

Example:

@example
Remap     2:2452/110.0 2:2452/110.7  "Martin Koser"
Rewrite   242:241/*    2:241/*

NetMail
send      hold         242:1000/1.all
change    crash  hold  242:1000/1.all 2.all
send      hold         242:1000/3
route     hold         242:1000/50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59
@end example



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Packing, Areas.bbs, Routing, Config files

@section @code{packing} Config File
@cindex Packing

@noindent
This file contains the packer (archiver) definitions and packing
commands for @code{ftnpack}.

@noindent The format of this file is:

@example
arc        @i{name}  @code{"}@i{archiver}@code{"}
prog       @i{name}  @code{"}@i{program}@code{"}
progn      @i{name}  @code{"}@i{program}@code{"}

pack       @i{name}  @i{nodes}
rpack      @i{name}  @i{dest-node}  @i{nodes}
fpack      @i{name}  @i{dest-node}  @i{nodes}
dirpack    @i{dir}  @i{name}  @i{nodes}
@end example

@noindent Packer/program definitions:

@table @code

@item arc
Defines the archiver @i{name} as program @i{archiver}. The @i{archiver}
string must contain two @code{%s}, the first one is replaced with the
archive name, the second one with the packet name.

@item prog
@item progn
Defines the program @i{name} as @i{program}. The @i{program} string must
contain a @code{%s}, which is replaced with the name of the packet to be
processed. @code{prog} deletes the packet after successfully running
@code{program}, @code{progn} doesn't.

@end table


@noindent Packing definitions:

@table @code

@item pack
Pack all mail addressed to @i{nodes} using the archiver defined as
@i{name}. The archiver name @code{noarc} indicates that the mail packet
should not be packed, but copied to the OUT file of the node.

@item rpack
Same as @code{pack}, but pack all mail addressed to @i{nodes} to the
archive for @i{dest-node}.

@item fpack
Similar to @code{rpack}, but the packet is archived for the normal
arcmail packet for each node. This archive is then attached to the FLO
file of @i{dest-node}.

@item dirpack
Archive packets for @i{nodes} in special directory @i{dir}, not the
standard outbound.

@end table

Example:

@example
arc     zip     "/usr/local/bin/zip -gkj %s %s"
progn   gate    "/usr/lib/fidogate/ftn2rfc %s"
progn   areafix "/usr/lib/fidogate/ftnafpkt %s"

rpack   zip     2:242/41 2:242/42 242:2000/* 254:*/*
pack    noarc   2:2452/110.1 242:4900/99 254:2410/6.1
pack    zip     *
@end example



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Areas.bbs, Basic, Packing, Config files

@section @code{areas.bbs} EchoMail Distribution
@cindex EchoMail
@cindex areas.bbs

@noindent
This file contains the EchoMail areas and linked nodes. The file
@code{fareas.bbs} is used for file echos.

The format of this file is as follows, the first line being ignored for
compatibility with the standard DOS AREAS.BBS. Individual fields can be
enclosed in "..." to allow spaces, in particular for the area
description. 

@example
@r{[}#@r{]}@i{directory}  @i{area}  @r{[}@i{options}@r{]}  @i{nodes}
@end example

@table @i

@item @t{#}
Marks area as pass-through, i.e. no packets for the own address (zone
AKA or set by @code{-a}) will be created.

@item directory
The directory where the message base/file base for this area is located.
Currently FIDOGATE uses the directory for file areas only.

@item area
The area name.

@item options
Options for this area:
@table @code
@item -a @i{address}
Set alternate FTN AKA for this area.
@item -z @i{zone}
Set alternate zone AKA for  this area. If not  set, the zone information
is taken from  the first node in the  @i{nodes} list.  @code{ftnaf} will
automatically rewrite @code{areas.bbs}, inserting the @code{-z} option.
@item -l @i{lvl}
Set Areafix/Filefix access level for this area.
@item -k @i{key}
Set Areafix/Filefix access key for this area.
@item -d "@i{description}"
Description for this area. Enclose in @code{"..."} to allow spaces in
description text.
@item -#
Set pass-through flag for this area (same as @i{directory} starting with
@code{#}).
@item -r
Set read-only flag for this area. New downlink will have a read-only
status. NOT YET IMPLEMENTED.
@end table

@item nodes
The list of downlink nodes. This is a sorted short list of nodes as in
FIDO EchoMail SEEN-BYs and PATH. The first node in @i{nodes} is the
uplink and stays at this place, though. Do @i{not} put your own main
address into the @i{nodes} list. (If the gateway has a different
address, then it must be included in @code{nodes}!)

@end table




@c ***************************************************************************
@page
@node Basic, Sendmail, Areas.bbs, Top
@chapter Basic Configuration

@cindex Configuration

There seems to be some confusion about the basic configuration of the
mail/news system, the gateway, and the tosser, so I added this
chapter. Hopefully this will help ...

@menu
* Sendmail::	       Sendmail configuration
* Example Point::      Example point configuration
* Example Point 2::    Example configuration with 2 point addresses
* Example Node::       Example leaf node configuration
@end menu



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Sendmail, Example Point, Basic, Basic

@section Sendmail Configuration
@cindex Configuration
@cindex sendmail

@noindent
This section describes the FIDOGATE additions to the sendmail V8 m4
configuration.

FIDOGATE adds two new mailer files, @code{ftn.m4} and @code{ffx.m4}. Use
@code{MAILER(ftn)} and/or @code{Mailer(ffx)} to include these mailer
definitions. (See the comment above for what ffx is good for. Most
likely you won't need it.)

Please note that the new FIDOGATE mailers are based on the SMTP mailer
sender/recipient rewrite rules, so including @code{MAILER(smtp)} is
mandatory!

@noindent
FIDOGATE ftn mailers (using the @code{ftnmail} wrapper for
@code{rfc2ftn}):

@table @code

@item ftn
Mailer for sending to systems registered in the @code{hosts} config
file. @code{ftn} will bounce mails if the receiving host is not
registered or marked as down.

@item ftni
Mailer for sending to a typical p.f.n.z domain,
e.g. @code{.fidonet.org}. @code{ftni} will send the mail to any system,
regardless of the registration in @code{hosts}.

@item ftna
Like @code{ftni}, but the @code{ftna} mailer also sets the address and
uplink of the gateway to the relay host passed to this mailer.

@item ftno
Like @code{ftna}. In addition, this mailer sets the directory for
packets created by @code{rfc2ftn} to SPOOLDIR/outpkt/@i{relayhost}.

@end table

@noindent
FIDOGATE ffx mailer (using the @code{ffxmail} utitility):

@table @code

@item ffx
Mailer for sending via the FIDOGATE ffx sub-system.

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Example Point, Example Point 2, Sendmail, Basic

@section Example Point Configuration
@cindex Configuration
@cindex Example
@cindex Point

@noindent
@b{Please note that this point configuration uses the FIDOGATE
tosser. Thus, it's different from the point configuration described in
Roland Rosenfeld's old Point HOWTO!!! The Point HOWTO configuration will 
definitely NOT work with FIDOGATE version 4!!!}

Actually, this point configuration is very similar to the node
configuration described in the next section.

Let's assume the following addresses:

Fido point address 2:2499/999.9

Boss node (NetMail and EchoMail) 2:2499/999


@noindent
Address configuration @code{fidogate.conf} (gateway and point address
are the same!), gateway configuration @code{EchoMail4D} is stricly
reqired:

@example
...
Address 2:2499/999.9
...
EchoMail4D
...
@end example

@noindent
Routing configuration @code{routing}: mail for the local address on
hold, everything else is send to the boss node.

@example
NetMail
route    hold   2:2499/999.9
route    normal 2:2499/999 1:* 2:* 3:* 4:* 5:* 6:*

EchoMail
sendmove hold   2:2499/999.9
sendmove normal *
@end example


@noindent
Packer configuration @code{packing}: no packing (noarc, this is very
important) for own address, @code{zip} is the default archiver for
everything else.

@example
arc  zip    "/usr/bin/zip -9gkjq %s %s"

pack noarc  2:2499/999.9
pack zip    *
@end example

@noindent
Next, the EchoMail areas must be listed in the @code{areas.bbs} file. Do
@i{not} put your point address into @code{areas.bbs}! Example with two
areas (the directory @code{X} is not used for EchoMail areas), which
must be non-passthrough:

@example
Example Point!User Name
X LINUX.GER 2:2499/999
X UNIX.GER  2:2499/999
@end example

In the gateway configuration, these areas must be listed in the
@code{areas} config file:

@example
LINUX.GER fido.ger.linux -8
UNIX.GER  fido.ger.unix  -8
@end example


The example configuration files for this configuration can be found in
@code{examples/point/}. See also @code{scripts/run/runpoll} for a
suitable poll script, which does everything necessary for a FIDOGATE
point.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Example Point 2, Example Node, Example Point, Basic

@section Example Configuration with 2 Point Addresses
@cindex Configuration
@cindex Example
@cindex Point

@noindent
This section describes a point setup with 2 different point addresses
and 2 different boss nodes. Thanks to Stephan Zellerhoff
<stephan@@poi.westfalen.de> for contributing some stuff.

Let's assume the following addresses:

Primary point address 2:2499/999.9, boss node 2:2499/999

Secondary point address 2:2498/888.8, boss node 2:2498/888

@noindent
Setup with FIDOGATE:

@table @b

@item Addresses
Put the following address statements in @code{fidogate.conf}
@example
Address 2:2499/999.9
Address 2:2498/888.8
@end example
Please note that the primary point address must be the @i{first} entry!

@item Sendmail
Use the sendmail @code{mailertable} feature and create the following
entries for routing Fidonet mail:
@example
# Mail to 2:2498/*, secondary address
.n2498.z2.fidonet.org    ftna:p8.f888.n2498.z2.fidonet.org
# Everything else 2:*/*, primary address
.z2.fidonet.org          ftna:p9.f999.n2499.z2.fidonet.org
@end example
Please note that in this setup, the relay host specified with the
@code{ftna} mailer is your @i{own} address, not your boss node!!!

@item Areas
Areas send to the primary boss don't require anything special in the
@code{areas} config file, areas send to the secondary boss must have the
@code{-a 2:2498/888.8} option, e.g.
@example
LINUX.GER    fido.ger.linux    -a 2:2498/888.8 -8
@end example

@item Areas.BBS
Likewise, areas send to the secondary boss must have the @code{-a
2:2498/888.8} option in @code{areas.bbs} and the secondary boss as the
uplink, e.g.
@example
X LINUX.GER    -a 2:2498/888.8    2:2498/888
@end example

@item Routing
The netmail routing must be adapted to send mail to the secondary boss,
e.g. everything for net 2498:
@example
NetMail
route    hold     2:2499/999.9
route    hold     2:2498/888.8

route    normal   2:2498/888 2:2498/*.*
route    normal   2:2499/999 2:*

EchoMail
sendmove hold     2:2499/999.9 2498/888.8
sendmove normal   *
@end example

@item Packing
Packer configuration @code{packing}: no packing (noarc, this is very
important) for all of our own addressess, @code{zip} is the default
archiver for everything else.

@example
arc  zip    "/usr/bin/zip -9gkjq %s %s"

pack noarc  2:2499/999.9 2498/888.8
pack zip    *
@end example

@end table

Otherwise see the standard point configuration with a single address.



@c ***************************************************************************
@node Example Node, Usage, Example Point 2, Basic

@section Example Leaf Node configuration
@cindex Configuration
@cindex Example
@cindex Node


@noindent
Let's assume the following addresses:

Fido main address 2:2499/999

Uplink (NetMail and EchoMail) 2:2499/900

Gateway point address 2:2499/999.1

Two points, Max Mueller @@ 2:2499/999.10, Sabine Meier @@ 2:2499/999.11


@noindent
Address configuration @code{fidogate.conf}:

@example
Address     2:2499/999
GateAddress 2:2499/999.1
@end example

@noindent
Routing configuration @code{routing}: NetMail for the two points will be
remapped to their point addresses, everything else to the gateway (where
you will be reading your mail). NetMail for all points is @code{send}
onto hold, everything else @code{route}d to your uplink. EchoMail is
alway put onto hold.

@example
remap    2:2499/999.0 2:2499/999.10 "Max Mueller"
remap    2:2499/999.0 2:2499/999.11 "Sabine Meier"
remap    2:2499/999.0 2:2499/999.1  "*"

NetMail
send     hold   2:2499/999.*
route    normal 2:2499/900 1:* 2:* 3:* 4:* 5:* 6:*

EchoMail
sendmove hold   2:2499/999.*
sendmove normal *
@end example


@noindent
Packer configuration @code{packing}: @code{noarc} packing for the
gateway address, @code{zip} is the default archiver for everything else.

@example
arc      zip    "/usr/bin/zip -9gkjq %s %s"

pack     noarc  2:2499/999.1
pack     zip    *
@end example

@noindent
Next, the EchoMail areas must be listed in the @code{areas.bbs} file. Do
@i{not} put your node address into @code{areas.bbs}! Example with two
areas, both subscribed by the gateway and your points (the directory
@code{X} is not used for EchoMail areas):

@example
Your system name!sysop name
#X LINUX.GER 2:2499/900 999.1 .10 .11
#X UNIX.GER  2:2499/900 999.1 .11
@end example

@code{#} denotes a @i{passthrough} area, i.e. no packets for the own
address (2:2499/999) are created. All EchoMail will be send to the
gateway (.1).

In the gateway configuration, these areas must be listed in the
@code{areas} config file:

@example
LINUX.GER fido.ger.linux -8
UNIX.GER  fido.ger.unix  -8
@end example

For regular processing, the following scripts should be run from cron
every 20 min or so:
@table @code

@item rungate
Inbound gateway (Fido -> Internet and FTN -> FTN) processing

@item runin
Inbound tosser and ticker processing

@item runmail
Outbound gateway for mail (Internet -> Fido) processing.

@item runnews
Outbound gateway for news (Internet -> Fido) processing.

@item runout
Outbound packet processing (various sources).

@end table

To use the areafix, the gateway and the mail system must be working. You
can then install suitable aliases in @code{/etc/aliases}:

@example
# Areafix/Filefix - FIDOGATE ftnaf
areafix: "|/usr/lib/fidogate/ftnafmail"
areamgr: areafix
filefix: "|/usr/lib/fidogate/ftnafmail -F"
filemgr: filefix
@end example

That's it. I hope that this short chapter on basic configuration clarifies
some of the darker point of the FIDOGATE configuration. Anyway, please
help to improve the FIDOGATE documentation.




@c ***************************************************************************
@page
@node Usage, RFC Headers, Example Node, Top
@chapter FIDOGATE Usage

@cindex Usage

@menu
* RFC Headers:: RFC Headers in FTN Messages
* X Headers::   X Headers in RFC Messages
@end menu


@c ***************************************************************************
@page
@node RFC Headers, X Headers, Usage, Usage
@section RFC Headers in FTN Messages

@cindex RFC header
@cindex Header

@noindent
FIDOGATE's @code{ftn2rfc} supports the following RFC headers at the
start of an FTN message. RFC headers must be the first text lines,
max. 3 empty lines before the RFC headers are allowed. Only one header
line of each type is allowed.

@table @code

@item From: @i{address}
Sets From header line. If set and the @code{areas} flag @code{-g} is on,
messages will not be gated, because they are considered comming from
another FTN-RFC gateway.

@item Reply-To: @i{address}
Sets Reply-To header line.

@item To: @i{address}
Sets To header line.

@item Cc: @i{address}
Sets Cc header line.

@item Bcc: @i{address}
Sets Bcc header line.

@item Newsgroups: @i{groups}
Sets Newsgroups header line. NOT YET IMPLEMENTED.

@item Sender: @i{address}
Sets Sender header line. NOT YET IMPLEMENTED.

@item Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit @r{|} 8bit @r{|} quoted-printable
Sets content encoding type, overriding the default configured in
@code{fidogate.conf} (@code{NetMail8bit}, @code{NetMailQuotedPrintable})
or @code{areas} (@code{-8}, @code{-Q}).

@end table

@code{ftn2rfc} sends mail to all addresses listed in To, Cc, and Bcc. It
support the RFC1036 standard address formats:

@example
user@@do.main
user@@do.main (Real Name)
Real Name <user@@do.main>
@end example

Multiple addresses can be separated by a @code{,}.



@c ***************************************************************************
@page
@node X Headers, Index, RFC Headers, Usage
@section X Headers in RFC Messages

@cindex X header
@cindex Header

@noindent
FIDOGATE's @code{rfc2ftn} supports the following X headers in RFC
messages:

@table @code

@item X-Comment-To: @i{name}
Use for the recipient's name in news articles.

@item X-Flags: @i{flags}
@table @code
@item c
Message is crash.
@item p
Message is private (default for mail).
@item h
Message is hold.
@item f
Subject contains file attachment name.
@item r
Sets return receipt request.
@item m
Generates a FTN style @code{^MSGID}, i.e. @code{^AMSGID: }@i{Z:N/F.P
1234abcd}. In addition, no @code{^AREPLY} kludge is generated. THIS FLAG
IS NOT RECOMMENDED FOR NORMAL OPERATION!!!
@item n
Do not generate a From line, and the @code{^AREPLYADDR}, @code{REPLYTO}
kludges.
@end table

@end table



@c ***************************************************************************
@page
@node Index, , X Headers, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp


@c @summarycontents
@contents

@bye
